Title: Armenia
Date: 2017-04-11
Modified: 2017-04-11 13:01:44
Excerpt: Something
Template: case
Slug: case-studies/armenia
PDF: /files/pdfs/Case%20study%20-%20Armenia.pdf

---

**Contents**

[TOC]

---

Armenia illustrates the progress that can be made by generating reputational
concerns using public ratings. Since 2001, the Armenian government has made
substantial improvement on an extensive trafficking problem. The government was
highly motivated to improve its Tier ranking, comparing itself with other
countries. As seen in Figure 2 Armenia started out as a Tier-3 country in 2002.
In the early years, officials tended to view human trafficking as a problem for
donors to solve, and the US pushed hard for the country to take ownership of
the problem. Legislation was passed in 2006, but not until 2009 did the
government start to take responsibility for the issue and give it higher
priority. Through close collaboration with the embassy, by 2013 it reached Tier
1, where it has remained since. The embassy also worked with the IOM, OSCE, and
NGOs and cultivated a set of “reliable anti-TIP interlocutors” in the
government.[^35] The willingness in 2009 of a new deputy prime minister who had
a good working relationship with the US embassy, Armen Gevorkian, to invest
himself in all aspects of the issue further facilitated cooperation.[^36] In
addition, the US took part in many practical assistance programs to fight TIP.

*The case demonstrates progress that was driven by the concern for the Tier
ranking, which opened up opportunities for close diplomatic engagement. This
underscores the basic argument about reputational concerns. It also shows the
value of good working relationships and of indirect augmentation of the
scorecard pressure through collaboration with civil society and IGOs. Finally,
it illustrates how the information gathering that the TIP Report brings can
focus attention and contribute to changes in domestic practices.*

## Background

With its central location to Eastern Europe, Asia and the Middle East, Armenia
is a source and, to a lesser extent, destination country for men, women, and
children subjected to sex and labor trafficking. Women and children are
increasingly subjected to sex and labor trafficking and forced begging within
Armenia. Armenian victims sometimes end up trafficked to the United Arab
Emirates (UAE) and Turkey, whereas Chinese women sometimes are trafficked into
Armenia. Children often work, making them vulnerable to trafficking. As Figure
2 shows, the country has experienced every rating on the tier scale,
consistently graduating from bottom to top with the policy index also
indicating accompanying success. The gains have been particularly pronounced
during the regime of President Serzh Sargsyan.

![Armenia’s TIP ranking and policy during governments, 2002–2014](/files/images/timeline_ARM.png){.img-fluid}

*Figure 2: Armenia’s TIP ranking and policy during governments, 2002–2014*

Statistic                             | Value
------------------------------------- | --------------------
Average GDP per capita                | $2,795.46
Total aid                             | $7,017.22 million
Aid from US                           | $1,378.93 million
Average total aid as percent of GDP   | 6.61%
Total TIP grants                      | $1,728,605

*Table 2: Key Armenian statistics, averaged 2001–2013*

## Direct diplomacy

Scorecard diplomacy on trafficking was a high priority for the US embassy, and
meetings were frequent and at a high level and the embassy worked to build
strong interlocutors. Meetings included the deputy prime minister and minister
of territorial administration, the deputy foreign minister, members of
parliament, the deputy defense minister, a presidential national security
adviser and on several occasions the cables not that the issue rose to the
level of the president. The documentation through the cables available begins
in 2002 and is most intensive in the years 2002-2006. The cables that discuss
TIP constitute 5 percent of the overall available cables, suggesting that TIP
was a highly discussed topic in general. In the early years, the US pushed
domestic officials to take ownership of the trafficking issue. The TIP report
and local embassy pressured the government to address official complicity in
trafficking and to increase prosecutions. Initially some officials were in
denial. Lack of official recognition of the problem within many sectors of the
government, however, contributed to the overall lack of progress. In 2005 the
Minister of Justice declared that “trafficking does not exist as a phenomenon
in Armenia.”[^37] Scorecard diplomacy also focused on reorganizing the domestic
administration and oversight of TIP policy, increasing inter-agency anti-TIP
cooperation, and ensuring that the TIP commission had clout and was staffed
well. The embassy also offered input into the content of anti-trafficking law
and pushed for stricter penalties and full criminalization. Scorecard diplomacy
also included legislative assistance offered through the OSCE and a resident
legal advisor, as well as grants to support the strengthening of law
enforcement and victim referral.

## Indirect pressure

Multiple international organizations and actors were at work in Armenia. The US
cooperated extensively with and funded the IOM and the OSCE efforts. They
praised the work of the OSCE, which with US support helped organize an
exhibition in Yerevan to raise awareness about TIP.[^38] The US also funded a
survey on TIP that the IOM initiated and carried out, an IOM program for a
hotline to assist victims, another program to provide safe havens, and yet
another for writing a manual for the diplomatic core offering guidelines for
interviewing and repatriating TIP victims.[^39] As noted, the US also funded
the OSCE legislative assistance efforts to advise on the substance of
legislative reforms. It has also interacted frequently with the NGO community,
which has been aggressive in fighting TIP and skeptical of the government
efforts, using NGOs as a source of information on TIP and funding
research.[^40] The Armenian government, knowing this, sought to sometimes
pressure and at other times work with the NGOs, who had to walk a fine line
between influencing and being pressured. As the government became more
accepting of the TIP problem, collaboration with NGOs became more
constructive.[^41]

The media also enhanced scorecard diplomacy in Armenia by covering the report
and being specific about its criticisms,[^42] although at times the government
has also used the media to criticize the report’s integrity.

## Concerns

The government was candid that it was motivated to improve its Tier rating. For
example, after the 2004 report came out, the head of the Armenian government’s
Migration and Refugees Department told local media that Armenia’s Tier 3 rating
in the first 2002 report shocked the government into action: “This assessment
of Armenia was like a cold shower, as their approach was very strict and
unexpected. In any case, we were not disappointed ending up in such a
situation, but were given an incentive and concentrated all our efforts on
making the fight against trafficking more organized.” He displayed reputation-
as-image concern as he continued, “It is clear to the world that in Armenia,
not only do we understand the importance of fighting trafficking, we also take
certain effective steps,” noting specifically Armenia’s desire for “integration
into European structures.” [^43] Armenian officials also echoed this sentiment
directly to the US officials, whom they told that Armenia was “anxious to
portray itself as an ally to UN and other International arenas in this
fight”[^44] and that they hoped for US support in Armenia’s efforts to join the
UN Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice.

It was clear that Armenia saw their TIP report ranking as an issue where status
vis-à-vis other countries was relevant. In 2007 the Armenian government drew up
a detailed report to compare Armenia’s report with that of Azerbaijan, Turkey,
and Georgia, “highlighting differences in the three countries’ performance
which seemed decisive in Armenia’s neighbors being graded higher than
Armenia.”[^45]

Officials’ concern with image was also evident in officials’ repeated practice
of agreeing privately with the US while publically criticizing the report.[^46]
In 2005 the US downgraded Armenia to the watch list, criticizing, among other
things, trafficking penalties as too mild. The US allegations of official
complicity in trafficking motivated the government to clear its reputation.
Although the prosecutor denied any evidence of such official complicity,[^47]
prosecutions in general increased in the fall of 2005.[^48] Armenian officials
and NGOS met specifically to discuss trafficking in advance of the embassy’s
submission of the 2006 TIP Report and urged all agencies to submit information
to the embassy.[^49] Tellingly, after the 2006 report, the government dismissed
the accuracy of the report in public, but President Kocharian called a high-
level meeting to discuss the issue, and officials privately remained very
accepting and appreciative of the legal advice on the legislation.[^50]

Illustrating the “status maintenance” mechanism discussed in chapter 1,
domestic attention has continued on keeping the Tier 1 rating earned in
2013. In 2015 the media reported widely on the report, noting, “The Republic of
      Armenia has maintained its Tier I status for a third year in a row in the
      US State Department’s 2015 Trafficking in Persons assessment.” They once
      again stressed the reputation-as-image concern, continuing, “Armenia is
      among just 31 countries out of 188 to have achieved Tier I status.”[^51]

Finally, the case also suggests the officials may take personal pride in an
issue as discussed in Chapter 2 of the book. One cable updating Washington on
the TIP situation notes that “The GOAM finally took our advice on this in 2008,
appointing the Deputy Prime Minister/Minster of Territorial Administration
Armen Gevorgian as chair, and this new structure has indeed energized
government efforts. Gevorgian seems to have taken on the TIP issue as something
that will fro personally, and has engaged himself energetically in the policy
issues.”[^52]

The US also provided great assistance to Armenia, which may have influenced
government responses. As a former US ambassador explained, “It was an embassy
mostly about assistance. So the threat to assistance was taken very seriously
by us and by the Armenians.”[^53] Local Armenian media speculated that the
threat of sanctions could have contributed to the creation of the
commission.[^54] That said, no public documented discussions of sanctions
between US and Armenian officials exist.

## Outcomes

### Legislation and other policy

The US had a heavy hand in pushing for anti-TIP policy. In April 2003, Armenia
amended its criminal code to criminalize trafficking for sexual exploitation.
The US TIP Report was cataclysmic, a fact stressed both by local NGOs, [^55]
IGOs, and government officials.”[^56] An IOM official noted that the
organization’s initial efforts had fallen flat, but that “It was only after the
US State Department’s report that the government decided to take action and to
work with the IOM.”[^57] The US continued to play a strong role in legislative
reforms, sometimes offering specific —and often well-received— advice on the
wording of the legislation and also sending a legal adviser to work on the
law.[^58] At other times the US worked primarily through the Organization for
Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), which it funded to analyze the
legislative gaps.[^59] For several years the embassy pushed for full
criminalization and stricter penalties. The eventual strengthening of penalties
can be linked directly to interactions with the US about Tier ratings and
criticisms in the US TIP Report.[^60] By funding the OSCE legislative
assistance efforts and sending a resident legal advisor, the US advised on the
substance of legislative reforms. Parliament amended the Criminal Code in June
2006, following much of the US advice provided through the OSCE and other
channels.[^61]

The embassy continued to pressure the government to pass a new action plan and
fund it properly, which eventually occurred.[^62] The US legal advisor assisted
in the formulation of the Action Plan.[^63] The embassy also pushed on issues
such as official complicity in trafficking and increasing prosecutions of such
cases. The US funded grants to support the strengthening of law enforcement
agencies’ response to trafficking, including separate grants for training in
victim referral and training in investigating trafficking cases. By 2009, more
vigorous prosecutions were starting, with, in one major case, the embassy
noting, “This is the type of vigorous prosecution that the USG applauds, and
which it has been training and pushing the GOAM \[Government of Armenia\] to
pursue for years …\[\]… We continue to see and welcome the new level of
maturity and willingness by Armenian law enforcement and the judiciary to
address the trafficking issue seriously.”[^64]

Armenia’s success is far from complete, but its progress has been remarkable.
Right from the beginning, the US frequently discussed the issue with high-level
government officials, who showed concern about the US Tier rating and sought
concrete information for how to improve their rating. The embassy reported that
concrete results often followed the discussions.[^65]

Later developments bear mentioning. The 2014 TIP Report pushed the country on
its efforts to identify victims of forced labor. Some progress was reported the
next year when the reports noted that the government enhanced efforts to
protect identified victims by adopting the Law on Identification and Assistance
to Victims of Human Trafficking and Exploitation, but it still had not
completed reforms to improve labor inspections.

### Institution building

The US was involved with policy in several ways. It advised the government to
reorganize the domestic administration and oversight of TIP policy*.* Following
the criticism by US and other international actors, in October 2002, the prime
minister decreed the creation of a government commission to address TIP and to
start designing an action plan including new anti-TIP provisions into the
Criminal Code. [^66] The Commission agreed to use the anti-TIP website that the
US funded for Armenia.[^67]

Indeed, Armenia illustrates the information gathering effect well. In February
2005, the Inter-Agency Anti-Trafficking Commission met to discuss the
government’s anti-TIP efforts. They timed the meeting specifically before
submission of information to the embassy for its filing to Washington for the
TIP Report. Representatives from the Ministry of Justice, Ministry of Labor and
Social Affairs, Department for Migration and Refugees, and others participated,
as well as IGOs and NGOs. The discussions revealed a lack of inter-agency
communication, which participants pledged to improve. The ministry chairing the
commission encouraged all participants to send the US embassy a detailed
summary of their anti-trafficking work before the TIP filing deadline. A
representative of Armenian law-enforcement recommended that permanent staff be
assigned under the Commission to improve its effectiveness. The US embassy
reported to Washington that “This meeting of the Commission, as well as
previous such gatherings, demonstrates that the USG’s TIP report is one of the
principal driving forces for the activities of the Government Anti-TIP
Commission … As the Commission reviews the implementation of the National
Action Plan on Combating Trafficking (2004-2006) and prepares its own report
and recommendations to the Government, it is clear that the USG’s report is
serving as a catalyst for interagency anti-TIP cooperation and is setting the
Commission up as a more effective tool in coordinating the GOAM efforts on
fighting TIP.[^68] That the TIP reporting requirements spurred these meetings
is a good example of how the information gathering that the TIP Report brings
can focus attention and thus contribute to changes in domestic practices.

The embassy put considerable pressure on the government to increase the
commission’s power.[^69] Years later, after repeated US efforts to push
national TIP policy to a higher administrational level, the commission was
elevated to a council with more decision making powers.[^70] The embassy also
successfully pushed for the appointment of a specific person as chair[^71] and
through numerous meetings with interlocutors, who on US urging took the issue
to the prime minister, got approval of budget requests for TIP policies.[^72]
Embassy officials assessed that the TIP reporting requirement was “serving as a
catalyst for interagency anti-TIP cooperation and…setting the Commission up as
a more effective tool in coordinating the GOAM efforts on fighting TIP.”[^73]
The US also funded Armenian officials to travel to destination countries to
facilitate cooperation issues with these countries, funded the creation of a
training manual for the diplomatic core in how to work with victims, and
“conducted an anti-trafficking seminar for judges, prosecutors, investigators
and police,” as well as other domestic capacity-building grants.[^74]

### The promotion and adoption of new norms and practices

Furthermore, the US embassy worked hard to change the mindset of Armenian
officials. From the early years the embassy stressed the need for Armenia to
“take ownership” of the issue.[^75] Over the years, this began to happen. As
the deputy prime minister noted in late 2009, “mentalities” about trafficking
had begun to change for the better, and US efforts had brought the issue to the
fore: “it wasn’t the case four years ago that trafficking was so frequently
discussed in the government.”[^76]

Armenia exemplifies how the TIP Report can serve spread information about
practices by other countries. As noted earlier, in 2007, one of the embassy’s
TIP interlocutors asked the embassy for feedback on a Ministry of Foreign
Affairs report that compared Armenia’s policies with the reports for Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Turkey, and Georgia to understand what was leading to better
ratings and said that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs would then target their
efforts on those areas where Armenia was deficient.[^77]

## Conditioning factors

Major obstacles to TIP progress in Armenia included the scope of the problem,
extensive official complicity, and poor domestic capacity. In several cases the
government was slow to prosecute suspected officials. The US also had to push
hard to get the government to allocate resources to the problem. An internal
political crisis of 2008 slowed progress further.[^78] The embassy enjoyed
strong relationships with many dedicated officials and cultivated “reliable
anti-TIP interlocutors,”[^79] but complained that these interlocutors lacked
sufficient authority.[^80] These factors all worked against US scorecard
diplomacy.

However, several factors also facilitated engagement. The embassy was heavily
engaged and prioritized the issue at a high-level, leading to the development
of consistent relationships. The authority of reliable interlocutors rose with
the ascension to power of Deputy Prime Minister Gevorgian, who also became
Chairman of the newly established Ministerial Council to Combat Trafficking and
with whom the embassy had good relations.[^81] The ascension of Gevorgian
facilitated greater attention to the issue and subsequent progress. In
addition, the US had some leverage through its sizeable assistance program,
including assistance targeted at TIP problems. US efforts to use scorecard
diplomacy were also bolstered by Armenia’s concern for its international and
domestic reputation, demonstrated by its sometimes vigorous attacks on the US
report in the media while privately cooperating. Finally, the case was helped
by cooperation with IGOs, especially the OSCE and the IOM, and local NGOs.

[^35]: 07YEREVAN691

[^36]: 09YEREVAN865

[^37]: As reported in the 2005 TIP Report discussion of Armenia.

[^38]: Text: Exhibition against Trafficking of Women Opens in Yerevan;
    Dept. of State, USAID, American Bar Assoc. among supporters.” State
    Department. (November 18, 2002 ): 448 words. LexisNexis Academic.
    Web. Date Accessed: 2012/02/21

[^39]: 04YEREVAN1344, 06YEREVAN895

[^40]: 04YEREVAN1344

[^41]: 06YEREVAN1161, 07YEREVAN351

[^42]: See for example 05YEREVAN1091

[^43]: Armenian official upbeat on fight against human trafficking.” BBC
    Summary of World Broadcasts. (June 18, 2004, Friday): 662 words.
    LexisNexis Academic. Web. Date Accessed: 2012/02/21

[^44]: 04YEREVAN1639

[^45]: 07YEREVAN888

[^46]: 06YEREVAN836

[^47]: 05YEREVAN2001

[^48]: 05YEREVAN2051

[^49]: 06YEREVAN214

[^50]: 06YEREVAN836

[^51]: “Armenia Maintains ‘Tier 1’ Status in the 2015 Trafficking in
    Persons Report,” *Asbarez*, 28 Jul. 2015, accessed 26 Dec. 2016,
    <http://asbarez.com/138159/armenia-maintains-Tier-1-status-in-the-2015-trafficking-in-persons-report/>.

[^52]: 09YEREVAN135

[^53]: Author’s Interview with John Ordway, Ambassador to Armenia from
    November 2001 to August 2004, Friday March 6, 2015. Phone.

[^54]: AZG DAILY \#57, 26-03-2003‬, SERVANTS OF BLACK BUSINESS,
    <http://www.azg.am/EN/2003032604>‬‬‬‬

[^55]: AZG DAILY \#211, 19-11-2002‬: ‬FIGHTING HUMAN TRAFFICKING,
    <http://www.azg.am/EN/2002111901>

[^56]: Armenian official upbeat on fight against human trafficking.” BBC
    Summary of World Broadcasts. (June 18, 2004, Friday ): 662 words.
    LexisNexis Academic. Web. Date Accessed: 2012/02/21

[^57]: Anti-trafficking Efforts in Armenia, Aghavni Eghiazaryan, 18:01,
    December 12, 2005. Published online. Last accessed on May 2, 2012 at
    <http://hetq.am/eng/articles/9526/anti-trafficking-efforts-in-armenia.html>

[^58]: 06YEREVAN761

[^59]: 04YEREVAN1344

[^60]: See for example 06YEREVAN761

[^61]: 06YEREVAN960

[^62]: 07YEREVAN106, 07YEREVAN1437

[^63]: 06YEREVAN761

[^64]: 09YEREVAN494

[^65]: 08YEREVAN244

[^66]: AZG DAILY \#42, 04-03-2003,‬ BRITISH EMBASSY LAUNCHES PROJECT TO
    RAISE AWARENESS ABOUT PEOPLE TRAFFICKING AND SMUGGLING,
    <http://www.azg.am/EN/2003030402‬‬‬‬>,
    <http://www.armeniaforeignministry.com/fr/hr/hr_trafficking.html>

[^67]: 04YEREVAN1344

[^68]: 06YEREVAN214

[^69]: 06YEREVAN1548

[^70]: 07YEREVAN1437**,** 08YEREVAN555, 09YEREVAN135

[^71]: 09YEREVAN135

[^72]: 06YEREVAN1548**,** 06YEREVAN1667, 09YEREVAN135

[^73]: 06YEREVAN214

[^74]: 05YEREVAN1387, 06YEREVAN895, 07YEREVAN250

[^75]: 04YEREVAN314

[^76]: 09YEREVAN865

[^77]: 07YEREVAN888

[^78]: 08YEREVAN555, 09YEREVAN135

[^79]: 07YEREVAN691

[^80]: 07YEREVAN106

[^81]: 09YEREVAN865
