Title: Ecuador
Template: case
Slug: case-studies/ecuador
PDF: /files/pdfs/Case%20study%20-%20Ecuador.pdf


Ecuador demonstrated strong political will to combat trafficking and respond to
scorecard diplomacy and US input. Other political factors such as political
instability, however, impeded progress at times. The US actively pushed for the
passage of an anti-TIP law and provided input into to its wording, to which the
GOE was receptive. Scorecard diplomacy was successful in getting progress on
legislation and implementation, though not as quickly as desired. It played a
role in shaping understanding of the norms surrounding human trafficking,
especially with difference with smuggling. *The case shows the importance of
individuals within the country’s government who take on TIP as a personal issue
and serve as allies to US efforts, as well as the potential for political
instability to disrupt these relationships. The case also illustrates the
effectiveness of dropping the ratings of a country as a means to solicit a
response, suggesting the value of public grading as a core function of
scorecard diplomacy.*

## Background

Ecuador is a source, transit, and destination country for men, women, and
children subjected to sex trafficking and forced labor. Most victims are women
and children who are trafficked in the domestic sex industry or forced domestic
servitude, begging, or agricultural labor. Local gangs are involved in sex
trafficking. Traffickers sometimes recruit children from impoverished
indigenous families. Some officials are allegedly complicit by warning
traffickers of law enforcement operations.[^99] There was little information
about TIP in Ecuador for the GOE to act on until an ILO report on the subject
came out in late 2003.[^100] The first inclusion of Ecuador in the TIP Report
in 2004, which placed Ecuador on Tier 3, set off a flurry of activities in the
GOE. Ecuador has since improved considerably over time, as shown in Figure 4.

![Ecuador’s TIP ranking and policy during governments, 2003–2014](/files/images/timeline_ECU.png){.img-fluid}

<div class="well"><em>Figure 4</em>: Ecuador’s TIP ranking and policy during governments, 2003–2014</div>

Statistic                             | Value
------------------------------------- | ---------------------
Average GDP per capita                | $4,461.13
Total aid                             | $17,218.77 million
Aid from US                           | $960.61 million
Average total aid as percent of GDP   | 2.21%
Total TIP grants                      | $7,856,032

<div class="well"><em>Table 4</em>: Key Ecuadorian statistics, averaged 2001–2013</div>

## Direct diplomacy

Scorecard diplomacy meetings to discuss TIP were frequent and meetings were
typically at a high level such as ministers and even once directly with the
President Alfredo Palacio. A key figure was the minister of government. Other
interlocutors included the foreign minister, the director of gender affairs,
the Human Rights Director in the ministry of foreign affairs, the first lady,
the acting attorney general, the president of congress, and the national chief
of police, among others. The documentation through the cables available begins
in 2004 and is most intensive between 2004-2007. The cables that discuss TIP
constitute 8 percent of the overall available cables, suggesting that TIP was a
top priority for the embassy. Indeed, A US TIP delegation visited Ecuador
shortly after the first time Ecuador was included in a TIP Report in 2004 to
drive home the message and work to formulate policy responses.[^101] The US
embassy developed a strong relationship with Minister of Government (MG) Raul
Baca, who reported on his progress within the GOE or requested US support in
specific areas. Scorecard diplomacy focused on the passage of anti-TIP
legislation and the embassy commented directly on versions of the text. The
embassy also often stressed implementation issues and the US funded education
programs and training programs, including shelters and a child protection
police unit. Indeed, Ecuador has received a large share of TIP grants. The US
also pushed for the assignment of a special prosecutor and specific persons for
appointments and positions within the government. The embassy also pushed to
start an inter-institutional commission on trafficking. Importantly, US
officials repeatedly sought to educate government officials about the nature
and scope of TIP and the difference between TIP and smuggling.

## Indirect pressure

The release of the first TIP Report launched the issue of human trafficking
into the spotlight of the media. According to Minister of Government Raul Baca,
TIP was getting attention in the media, and civil society had organized marches
to demand action from the GOE.[^102] This public attention augmented the
pressure from the report. The media was also attentive to the progress of TIP
legislation.[^103]

Several other actors contributed to anti-TIP policy in Ecuador and cooperated
with the US. The ILO opened a new shelter that the US officials visited. The US
funded the IOM and CARE International to implement anti-trafficking prevention
activities. The US also met with and funded several NGOs, both domestic and
international.[^104] For example, US funds helped the American Bar Association
advise on legislation.[^105] Thus it appears that the US was able to fund
organizations to help reinforce its message.

## Concerns

While its evident that Ecuador was extremely open to US advice, the source of
this openness is not clear. The record provides little information about
whether Ecuador’s government cared about sanctions or was concerned with
reputations. There is no record of Ecuadorian officials initiating discussions
about possible sanctions, but in 2005 the Ecuadorian embassy staff sometimes
mentioned the possibility of sanctions to domestic officials.[^106] Officials
also did not explicitly express concerns about Ecuador’s reputation. The
government didn’t express anger about harsh ratings, but did say that they
wanted the rating to improve.[^107] When Ecuador received a Tier 3 rating in
2005 the president went on national television to tell people that he cared
about trafficking.[^108] In general, drops in Tier ratings were particularly
successful in capturing the GOE’s attention, suggesting the Tier ratings
mattered.

The US efforts in Ecuador contributed to the salience of the issue, but an
important factor in making a real dent in TIP was the government’s own desire
to fix the problem. Often it appeared individuals drove this willingness. While
some officials may not have taken an interest in TIP prior to US engagement,
once the embassy brought the severity of the issue to their attention, many
became personally invested. In 2006, the embassy said it seemed that
“motivation to improve comes more from within than from embassy
prodding,”[^109] which likely explained much of the progress the GOE made.

## Outcomes

### Legislation

The U.S. pushed passage of anti-TIP legislation, contributed to the wording of
the legislation, and continued pressing for implementation after its passage.
During the first few years of the TIP Report, the US pressured the GOE to pass
an anti-TIP law, and the embassy and the American Bar Association (ABA)
contributed significantly to the wording of the legislation, also working
directly with the Supreme Court and the National Council of the Judiciary on
the issue. [^110] Shortly after the 2004 TIP Report placed Ecuador on Tier 3,
the government began work on a comprehensive anti-TIP bill. On September 6, the
President Gutiérrez sent a bill of penal code reforms related to TIP to
Congress.[^111] Three days later, the ambassador met with the President of
Congress and pushed him to get Congress to address TIP legislative reforms; he
was soon after told that Congress would prioritize the bill, including by
President Gutiérrez.[^112] Multiple bills on TIP were pending in Congress and
being reviewed and pushed for by the embassy,[^113] and they were soon combined
into one bill that defined TIP in compliance with G/TIP model
legislation.[^114] Several government officials promised the embassy they would
push Congress to pass the bill.[^115]

The GOE gave the embassy opportunities to comment directly on the wording as
the law was being drawn up.[^116] At one point, the Ecuadorian Supreme Court
asked the American Bar Association for help in drafting the law, and the US TIP
office funded the ABA to visit Ecuador multiple times.[^117] The government
incorporated the ABA’s suggestions into the bill.

Unfortunately, political instability slowed progress, but meetings with high-
level officials to press the issue kept it at the top of the agenda even amidst
the political turmoil. The eventual ousting of President Gutiérrez slowed even
progress further, but the embassy “redoubled” its efforts on TIP, despite the
new administration being less pro-American.[^118] Eventually, the law passed.

Afterwards, the USAID met with over 40 US and Ecuadorian government officials,
civil society, and international donors to assess needs with regards to
implementation.[^119] The US funded education programs and training programs
that were part of government policy implementation. For example, the US
sometimes funded training for law enforcement and other officials. The US also
funded various projects, mainly through USAID, including shelters and the child
protection police unit DINAPEN within the ministry of the interior.[^120] The
embassy suggestion to the attorney general to assign special TIP prosecutors
was followed by increased prosecutions. As a whole, the interaction suggests
that the US was fairly successful in getting progress on legislation and
implementation, though not as quickly as desired.

The political turmoil caused by the 2010 crisis, in which the National Police
rose up against President Rafael Correa, detracted from attention to TIP. In
2011 Ecuador was demoted to Tier 2 Watch List. By January 2013, a new criminal
code more than doubled minimum sentences for human trafficking,[^121] and
prosecutions and convictions increased.

### The promotion and adoption of new norms and practices

Through repeated meetings, US officials sought to educate government officials
about the nature and scope of TIP.[^122] The US embassy strove repeatedly to
help the government officials understand the difference between TIP and
smuggling and funded the ABA to train officials on the difference.[^123] In
2004 the UN and the ministry of foreign affairs co-sponsored a two-day
conference. Participants, including officers from the police unit dedicated to
protecting children, repeatedly confused smuggling and trafficking. The U.S.
additionally taught Ecuadorian officials about TIP by providing them examples
from their own policies. Ecuadorian officials also visited the US in October
2005 to learn about TIP policy.[^124]

### Institution building

The embassy also pressed for specific appointments and positions within the
government. They got Minister of Government Raul Baca to seek and receive
appointment as Official TIP Coordinator. In 2005 they proposed to Foreign
Minister Carrion that he chair the inter-ministerial TIP working group (though
there is no indication whether he did so).[^125] The Ecuadorian government also
sought out the embassy’s involvement. The Ministry of Government invited the
embassy to help start the inter-institutional commission to create a national
TIP plan. The embassy used the opportunity to push for the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs to also be involved in the commission.[^126] This US involvement with
the action plan continued for years.[^127]

## Conditioning factors

In Ecuador, the embassy’s personal interactions were very important. Meetings
went all the way to the president in 2005. The US met frequently with high-
level officials whom the embassy sought and often succeeded to get personally
invested in TIP. A prime example is their recruitment of First Lady Maria Paret
as a spokesperson and activist for TIP through her position as director of the
National Institute of Childhood and Family (INNFA). Certain figures within the
Ecuadorian government, including MG Baca, First Lady Paret, and prosecutor Lucy
Blacio were crucial in the fight against TIP. The embassy described Baca as “a
rare Gutiérrez administration bright light.”[^128]Allies such as these who
prioritized TIP helped enact change from within the government.

Indeed, the revolving door of the minister of government’s office after Baca’s
resignation underscored the importance of a steady interlocutor.[^129] The
embassy remained in close contact with the new minister, whom they had some
success cultivating.[^130] But he resigned quickly, making him the fourth to
resign in Gutiérrez’s two years in power. The embassy was not even able to meet
the next minister before he too resigned after only a month, and *his*
replacement was ousted a few weeks later when Congress voted President
Gutiérrez out of office. This political turmoil and the repeatedly changing
contacts prevented the embassy from reestablishing the strong cooperation they
had with the Ministry of Government on TIP, demonstrating how political shifts
can significantly disrupt embassy relationships and progress on TIP.

Other obstacles to progress included the government’s lack of understanding of
the difference between trafficking and smuggling. Fortunately these were
balanced by some favorable conditions such as strong political will on behalf
of the Ecuadorian government, US economic aid, and intensive US-funded training
programs.


[^99]: 2015 TIP Report

[^100]: US TIP Report 2004

[^101]: 04QUITO2198

[^102]: 04QUITO2447

[^103]: 04QUITO2519

[^104]: “Anti-Trafficking Technical Assistance: Ecuador Anti-Trafficking
    Assessment,” USAID, August 2006,
    <http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/pnadh204.pdf>, Accessed December 27,
    2016; 04QUITO2519; 04QUITO2773; 04QUITO3132; 05QUITO369.

[^105]: 05QUITO179, ABA received two grants in 2004 ($370,798) and 2005
    ($395,942).

[^106]: 05QUITO553

[^107]: 05QUITO78, 05QUITO1273

[^108]: 05QUITO1803

[^109]: 06QUITO2428

[^110]: 04QUITO2773 05QUITO224. American Bar Association, “Ecuador
    Programs,”
    <http://www.americanbar.org/advocacy/rule_of_law/where_we_work/latin_america_caribbean/ecuador/programs.html>

[^111]: 04QUITO2519

[^112]: 04QUITO2459, 04QUITO2571, 04QUITO2980

[^113]: 04QUITO2773

[^114]: 04QUITO2861

[^115]: 04QUITO3099, 04QUITO3257

[^116]: 04QUITO2861\_a. For the work of the ABA, see ABA Journal,
    4/6/2006, “SINISTER INDUSTRY: ABA Joins Worldwide Effort to Fight
    Criminal Trade in Human Beings.”

[^117]: American Bar Association, “Ecuador Programs,”
    <http://www.americanbar.org/advocacy/rule_of_law/where_we_work/latin_america_caribbean/ecuador/programs.html>;
    04QUITO2595; 05QUITO179; 05QUITO224

[^118]: 05QUITO78, 05QUITO224, 05QUITO490, 05QUITO534, 05QUITO995,

[^119]: “Anti-Trafficking Technical Assistance: Ecuador Anti-Trafficking
    Assessment,” USAID, August 2006,
    <http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/pnadh204.pdf>. Accessed December 27,
    2016

[^120]: 06QUITO2428

[^121]: US TIP Report 2014

[^122]: 05QUITO995

[^123]: 05QUITO224, 04QUITO2861\_a, 04QUITO3257

[^124]: 05QUITO2890

[^125]: 05QUITO2506

[^126]: 05QUITO2762

[^127]: 08QUITO696

[^128]: 04QUITO2598

[^129]: 04QUITO2598

[^130]: 05QUITO61, 05QUITO78
