Title: Israel
Date: 2017-04-11
Modified: 2017-04-11 13:01:44
Excerpt: Something
Template: case
Slug: case-studies/israel

---

<p><a href="/files/pdfs/Case%20study%20-%20Israel.pdf" class="btn btn-primary">
<span class="glyphicon glyphicon-download-alt" aria-hidden="true"></span>&nbsp;
PDF
</a></p>

[TOC]

---

This case illustrates many of the key mechanisms of scorecard diplomacy. The US
TIP Report ratcheted government attention to human trafficking in Israel. Once
the report shone the spotlight on Israel, the government convened committees
and seminars to examine the issue. The attention led to policy changes,
including the passage of comprehensive anti-trafficking legislation, adopting a
national action plan, and stepping up practical ways to fight trafficking. As
part of the pressure for new legislation, the US shaped how trafficking was
defined, effectively broadening the law to include labor trafficking. The US
also influenced domestic institutions by promoting and funding domestic
shelters, prompting the government to create new committees that directly
examined the annual TIP Report, and even influencing the choice of the official
anti-TIP coordinator, a person to whom the US named as TIP Hero, thereby
increasing her profile.

*Foremost, Israel illustrates how countries can become very concerned with
their reputation, not simply driven by economic concerns, but by concerns about
image and status. Israeli officials were ashamed that Israel was grouped with
less socially desirable states and referred directly to Israel’s international
reputation. They expressed desire to obtain a better rating, even when
sanctions were not looming. The case also illustrates how scorecard diplomacy
empowers other actors. Israeli NGOs and others used the report as an
opportunity to criticize the government.*

## Background

Israel is primarily a destination country for men and women subjected to forced
labor and sex trafficking. Low-skilled workers arrive for temporary low-skilled
manual labor jobs from Asia, Eastern Europe, and West Africa. Women from
Eastern Europe, Uzbekistan, China, Ghana, and other places enter on tourist
visas to work in prostitution, but become victims of trafficking. Pressures to
combat TIP were present already in the late 1990s as the international
attention to human trafficking was increasing, but despite high profile
criticism from organizations like Amnesty International inaction persisted. A
Knesset’s commission of inquiry held only two sessions before its six-month
mandate expired. NGOs criticized the lack of government’s response.[^193]
Israel was initially very surprised by the harsh US Tier 3 rating. Since then,
Israel has made policy progress, as shown in Figure 7.

![Israel’s TIP ranking and policy during governments, 2000–2014](/files/images/timeline_ISR.png){.img-fluid}

*Figure 7: Israel’s TIP ranking and policy during governments, 2000–2014*

Statistic                             | Value
------------------------------------- | --------------------
Average GDP per capita                | $28,928.66
Total aid                             | $3,520.40 million
Aid from US                           | $3,294.01 million
Average total aid as percent of GDP   | 0.34%
Total TIP grants                      | $1,624,909

*Table 7: Key Israeli statistics, averaged 2001–2013*

## Direct diplomacy

Scorecard diplomacy meetings to discuss TIP were frequent and often at the
highest levels such as ministers and heads of state. Over the years, these
included the defense minister, foreign minister, a National Police (INP)
Colonel, the justice minister, the minister of industry, trade, and labor, as
well as party leaders. The documentation through the cables available begins in
2004, although Israel was included in the report already in 2001. The cables
that discuss TIP constitute just 2 percent of the overall available cables, but
this likely reflects the overall strong relationship with Israel and the many
other top priorities, not that TIP was not a salient issue. In the beginning
scorecard diplomacy both directly from the Department of State and from the
embassy was focused on bringing attention to the issue and getting the
government to admit to the problem. Later on the focus was on shaping how
trafficking was defined so that it included labor trafficking. Scorecard
diplomacy was very hands on. Downgrades were used to push for action, and the
ambassador set conditions for an upgrade in a series of intensive meetings on
TIP. The US also promoted and funded domestic shelters and advocated for the
choice of the official anti-TIP coordinator, and encouraged the government to
create a national action plan.

## Indirect pressure

NGOs and the media magnified the pressure of scorecard diplomacy in Israel.
Throughout the years, the report received extensive media coverage,[^194] with
the embassy holding digital videoconferences and using funding to keep the
issue in the media.[^195] NGOs referenced the report to address the government.
For example, in 2001, Kav LaOved of the NGO Workers’ Hot Line issued a
statement saying, “We hope that this report will cause the Israeli authorities
to understand the seriousness of the problem and begin to treat the phenomenon
with the seriousness it deserves”[^196] Furthermore, in 2006, the impending
release of the TIP Report mobilized Jews worldwide. Over 3,000 signed a
petition calling for the GOI to stamp out the practice of human trafficking, to
be brought before the prime minister to coincide with the release of the TIP
Report.[^197] NGOs also served as sources of information for the report.[^198]

## Concerns

When the first US TIP Report came out in 2001, Israel was one of 23 countries
given the harshest rating, a Tier 3, in the report. This shocked many in
Israel, as the rating garnered considerable coverage in *The Jerusalem Post*.
Israeli officials were foremost driven by concern about Israel’s international
image. Although the immediate response to the initial 2001 Tier 3 was for the
government to call an “Urgent meeting due to concern about economic sanctions
following the publication of the U.S. State department report, that includes
Israel in a ‘blacklist’ of countries that traffic in persons,”[^199] it was the
shame of blacklisting rather than fear of the economic effects of aid sanctions
that motivated Israeli officials, a fact supported by one-on-one
interviews.[^200] Sanctions, if anything, were more stigmatizing than
financially consequential. Indeed, in 2001, any threat of sanctions was still
two years away due to the rules of the US legislation at the time, and the US
president would have to make a special determination on the matter, providing
yet another safeguard against sanctions coming into play. Similarly, once
Israel moved to Tier 2, concerns did not abate just because the threat of
sanctions was removed. [^201] Efforts were explicitly designed to move Israel
to Tier 1. Officials wanted Israel to be seen as a top performer, a sentiment
also often expressed in private meetings. All in all, the threat of sanctions
or even Israel’s special relationship with the US likely mattered, but was at
best part of the story.[^202] Rather, in numerous interviews, Israeli officials
said they feared the report undermined Israel’s quest for international
legitimacy and “clashed with its self-identity.”[^203] Officials saw TIP as
important to Israel’s “society and values,” as Foreign Minister Tzipi Livni
told the US attorney general.[^204] In 2001, the Head of the Foreign Ministry’s
Human Rights department said that the international repercussions of the report
for Israel are “severe and steps must be taken to remove Israel from the
*unflattering* category \[emphasis added\].”[^205] Officials noted the
importance of Israel being part of global norms in connection with the passage
of the 2006 law, which Law and Justice Committee Chairman Menachem Ben-Sasson
(Kadima) said placed “*Israel in line with the world’s most enlightened
nations* \[emphasis added\].”[^206] Comparisons were important. As Deputy
Foreign Minister Danny Ayalon said in 2009 to the Knesset subcommittee
analyzing the TIP Report, Israel did not want to be “lumped” with pariah
states, worrying about the “troubling political implications” of receiving the
same Tier Ranking as “states like Afghanistan, Jordan, and Botswana.”[^207]

## Outcomes

US efforts were key in boosting attention to TIP. Pressures to combat TIP were
present already in the late 1990s, but despite criticism from organizations
like Amnesty International, inaction persisted. A Knesset’s commission of
inquiry held only two sessions before its six-month mandate expired. NGOs
criticized the government’s lack of response.[^208] After the TIP Report rated
Israel a Tier 3 in 2001, the internal security minister held an emergency
conference “on setting the matter as a top police priority.”[^209] The
government quickly got to work on how to improve the rating.[^210] The Knesset
summoned the committee of inquiry into the trafficking of women. Also
immediately following the report, the minister of public security initiated a
seminar on trafficking that included participants from numerous ministries, law
enforcement, NGOs and the Knesset. Many sources attribute the changes in
attention to the US report.[^211]

Policy changes also followed. The Attorney-General Elyalkim Rubinstein called
for a crackdown on trafficking in women, charging that law enforcement
officials were not doing their job.[^212] In 2003, the GOI established the
Border Police Ramon Unit to patrol along the Egypt-Israel border, and Israel
passed the Criminal Organizations Bill, which facilitated the prosecution and
punishment of key members of several organized TIP operations.[^213] In January
2004 in Belarus, the Israel Police conducted the first-ever joint investigation
with a foreign police force on trafficking of women.”[^214] Following US
pressure, in February 2004 the government opened the first shelter for
trafficking victims using U.S. funds.[^215]

### Legislation

The US also played a strong role in changing legislation. Frequent elections
interfered with progress on TIP, so in 2006 the TIP Report downgraded Israel to
the watch list. This upset GOI officials, some of whom claimed Israel had made
significant effort, but the US ambassador cited legislation against labor
trafficking as a *sine qua non* for an upgrade.[^216] Direct engagement
followed with high-level officials like Foreign Minister Livni, Justice
Minister Ramon, and Defense Minister Peretz, who also headed the Labor
Party.[^217] Progress was not easy; Livni explained that political “turmoil”
impeded attention to TIP.[^218] Nonetheless, the US pushed repeatedly for
attention to TIP, particularly the legislation against labor trafficking,[^219]
linking Israel’s demotion to the watch list to lack of effort on labor
trafficking.[^220]

June 2006 was packed with meetings on the legislation with the minister of
industry, trade, and labor and Shas Party Chairman Eliyahu Yishai and
others.[^221] The ambassador also spoke with Knesset Speaker Dalia Itzik who
promised to take up TIP funding in the new budget.[^222] US Attorney General
Alberto Gonzales met the Israeli Minister of Justice Haim Ramon and expressed
concern that Israel was “trending in the wrong direction” in its handling of
trafficking issues, specifically citing the lack of legislation to outlaw labor
trafficking. He also made the same point directly with Prime Minister Olmert
and was assured that the bill would progress soon.[^223] July and August were
equally intensive with meetings. The ambassador continued discussions with
Itzik, who kept the ambassador abreast of Knesset anti-trafficking actions,
including two new laws to strengthen enforcement and provide legal aid to
trafficking victims.[^224] In the fall, the ambassador met with Acting Minister
of Justice Meir Sheetrit and “stressed the importance of including assistance
for legal support for victims of labor trafficking in new legislation now
before the Knesset.”[^225] To gain support across the political spectrum, the
US ambassador also met with Likud leader Netanyahu, who pledged to support the
legislation.[^226] In October 2006 the new trafficking law passed, adding labor
trafficking to the definition of trafficking.[^227] In December 2007 Israel
also followed up on recommendation to create a national plan as recommended in
the TIP Report.

All in all, Israel has made significant progress since 2001, and since 2012 has
maintained Tier 1 status, which Israeli politicians have pointed out in the
media.[^228]

### Institution building

US efforts influenced some Israeli institutions. Following US pressure, [^229]
in February 2004 the government opened the first shelter for trafficking
victims using U.S. funds.[^230] The Knesset subcommittee on women has also
repeatedly held meetings to review the US TIP Report, suggesting the report
became part of the regular policy discussions.[^231] In these meetings, the
report has led to discussion of substantial issues. In one meeting the
chairperson noted that “*the* *TIP Report raises the need for some new thinking
by the GOI* \[emphasis added\]. We will have to give thought to the question of
incriminating clients of the sex industry and the issue of sex service
advertising and we will be doing that in the next parliamentary session.”[^232]
The US also attended committee meetings in Knesset to discuss TIP.[^233]
Finally, US efforts also played a role in the appointment of TIP officials.
Awarding Rachel Gershuni, a prominent NGO leader, as a TIP Hero helped her to
be heard by the government[^234] and eventually appointed as anti-TIP
coordinator in the Ministry of Justice.

### The promotion and adoption of new norms and practices

As per the discussion of legislation, scorecard diplomacy played a role in
defining labor trafficking as part of human trafficking in a country that had
until then, heavily focused on sex trafficking. Scorecard diplomacy also
increased the focus on victims and the provision of services. In 2008, an
official from the State Attorney’s Office also took issue with the TIP Report’s
mention of internal trafficking and Israel as a source country for trafficked
women, noting that… “We do not recognize the phenomenon of internal trafficking
as referred to in the report.” [^235] Over the years, the TIP report did a lot
to change attitudes towards human trafficking in Israel and normalize the
discussion in Israeli politics of trafficking problems.

## Conditioning factors

Several factors hampered scorecard diplomacy in Israel. Initially officials
were unwilling to acknowledge the problem at all. Later, frequent elections
hampered the legislative progress. In 2006 Foreign Minister Livni explained
that “turmoil within the GOI over the last several years—when elections on
average took place every two years—made it difficult for the GOI and the
Knesset to maintain a sustained focus on the labor trafficking issue and
legislation addressing it.”[^236]

On the other hand, other factors facilitated influence. One of these was the
special relationship and the very close diplomatic contact that the countries
have enjoyed since the end of WWII. This gives the embassy particularly high-
level access to officials. The large aid relationship may also be helpful,
although it’s difficult to believe that Israel truly thought that aid could be
suspended over the TIP issue. The embassy also benefitted from an active civil
society and media and a strong official concern for the country’s international
image.


[^193]: The Jerusalem Report, “VICTORIA’S, AND ISRAEL’S, UGLY SECRET”, March
    12, 2001, <http://www.lexisnexis.com/hottopics/lnacademic/>, <http://solargeneral.com/jeffs-archive/slavery/victorias-and-israels-ugly-secret/>

[^194]: TELAVIV669; 06TELAVIV2072; 06TELAVIV2157; 06TELAVIV2239;
    07TELAVIV1727; 07TELAVIV3314; 08TELAVIV1185;09TELAVIV1564

[^195]: 07TELAVIV930

[^196]: The Jerusalem Post, “US: Israel Among States Lax on Human
    Trafficking”, July 13, 2001, LexisNexis Academic. Web. Date Accessed
    July 27, 2012.

[^197]: 06TELAVIV2072

[^198]: 05TELAVIV1679

[^199]: Protocol no. 14 of the Parliamentary Inquiry committee, cited in
    Efrat 2012 204..

[^200]: Interviews with Galon, Gershuni and Schonmann by Asif Efrat and
    cited in Efrat 2012.

[^201]: Alon 2002.

[^202]: As reported in local media. See 05TELAVIV669

[^203]: See Asif Efrat’s chapter in his book, *Governing Guns,
    Preventing Plunder*, which is based on numerous interviews done by
    Efrat and shared with the author. Efrat 2012 206.

[^204]: 06TELAVIV2618.

[^205]: Gilbert 2001.

[^206]: Alon 2006.

[^207]: 09TELAVIV1564

[^208]: The Jerusalem Report, “VICTORIA’S, AND ISRAEL’S, UGLY SECRET”,
    March 12, 2001, LexisNexis Academic. Web. Date Accessed: 2012/07/27.

[^209]: The Jerusalem Post, “Coalition MKs Losing Restraint”, July 19,
    2001, LexisNexis Academic. Web. Date Accessed: 2012/07/27.

[^210]: The Jerusalem Post, “US: Israel Among States Lax on Human
    Trafficking”, July 13, 2001, LexisNexis Academic. Web. Date
    Accessed: 2012/07/27.

[^211]: “Israel’s Thriving Sex Industry Records One Billion Dollars a
    Year”, December 9th, 2002.,
    <http://www.albawaba.com/business/israel%E2%80%99s-thriving-sex-industry-records-one-billion-dollars-year-0>.
    See also “US report shows Israel clamping down on trafficking in
    women,” Lexis Nexis. Jerusalem Post, 6 June 2002, and Vered Lee,
    “Human Trafficking to Israel Has Been Beaten. Let’s Now Tackle
    Prostitution,” *Haaretz*, 17 Mar. 2014, accessed 26 Dec. 2016,
    <http://www.haaretz.com/opinion/.premium-1.580160>

[^212]: A-G calls for crackdown on trafficking in women, Jerusalem
    Post, <http://www.highbeam.com/doc/1P1-46020247.html>, August 1,
    2001. Marion Marrache

[^213]: 05TELAVIV1679\_a, 05TELAVIV1336\_a.

[^214]: 05TELAVIV1337\_a

[^215]: 07TELAVIV1672; Gideon Alon and Ha’aretz Correspondent, “3,000
    Women A Year Trapped In Israel’s Sex Slave Industry”, *Haaretz*, 8
    Dec. 2002, accessed 26 Dec. 2016,
    <http://www.haaretz.com/report-3-000-women-a-year-trapped-in-sex-slave-industry-1.26034>;
    07TELAVIV599

[^216]: 06TELAVIV2226

[^217]: 06TELAVIV1932, also 06TELAVIV1984.

[^218]: 06TELAVIV2618

[^219]: 06TELAVIV1923; 06TELAVIV1945; 06TELAVIV1980; 06TELAVIV2413;
    06TELAVIV2784; 06TELAVIV3785; 06TELAVIV3843

[^220]: 06TELAVIV2620; 06TELAVIV2621

[^221]: 06TELAVIV2413.

[^222]: 07TELAVIV2413

[^223]: 06TELAVIV2620

[^224]: 06TELAVIV2784, 06TELAVIV3482

[^225]: 06TELAVIV3785

[^226]: 06TELAVIV3843

[^227]: 05TELAVIV1336; 05TELAVIV133706TELAVIV914; 06TELAVIV915;
    06TELAVIV1923; 06TELAVIV2621; 06TELAVIV3482

[^228]: Vered Lee, “Human Trafficking to Israel Has Been Beaten. Let’s
    Now Tackle Prostitution,” *Haaretz*, 17 Mar. 2014, accessed 26 Dec.
    2016, <http://www.haaretz.com/opinion/.premium-1.580160>, and Greer
    Fay Cashman, “Israel Leading World in Prevention and Reduction of
    Human Trafficking,” *The Jerusalem Post,* 2 Dec. 2014, accessed 26
    Dec. 2016,
    <http://www.jpost.com/Israel-News/Politics-And-Diplomacy/Israel-leading-world-in-prevention-and-reduction-of-human-trafficking-383473>.

[^229]: “Justice Minister Friedmann on Refugees, Ipr And”, n.d.,
    <http://dazzlepod.com/cable/07TELAVIV1672/?q=israel%20trafficking>.

[^230]: “3,000 Women A Year Trapped In Israel’s Sex Slave Industry”,
    n.d., 0, http://rense.com/general32/trapped.htm, and “GOVERNMENT OF
    ISRAEL ANNOUNCES NATIONAL PLAN TO”, n.d.,
    <http://dazzlepod.com/cable/07TELAVIV599/?q=tip%2C%20embassy%20Tel%20Aviv>.

[^231]: 08TELAVIV1578

[^232]: 08TELAVIV1578

[^233]: 07TELAVIV3314

[^234]: 06TELAVIV1652

[^235]: 08TELAVIV1578\_a, 08TELAVIV1185

[^236]: 06TELAVIV2618
