Title: Kazakhstan
Excerpt: Something
Template: case
Slug: case-studies/kazakhstan
PDF: /files/pdfs/Case%20study%20-%20Kazakhstan.pdf

---

**Contents**

[TOC]

---

The case of Kazakhstan highlights the importance of reputational concerns in
providing an opportunity for scorecard diplomacy to be influential. Although
Kazakhstan has struggled to establish its democratic credentials and been
unwilling to conform to many democratic expectations, it has vied for
international approval. Officials have been keen to portray the country as
modern and deserving of membership in the international community and the
associated clubs, such as the OSCE. This desire for recognition gave the US and
others an opening to influence TIP policy. Kazakhstan is also an important
partner for the US in Central Asia. The embassy worked closely with NGOs, IGOs
as well as national authorities and was able to influence outcomes
significantly.

*The case demonstrates influence on legislation, norms and institutions through
several of the features of scorecard diplomacy, most notably how the ratings
and concern for reputation incentivized the government, as well as the
importance of engagement with NGOs and individual stakeholders within
government.* *The case also illustrates the importance of international
reputational concerns as well as engagement and practical assistance as
constructive companions of scorecard diplomacy ratings.*

## Background

Kazakhstan was first seen as a country of origin and transit for young women
trafficked, primarily for prostitution to the United Arab Emirates, Greece,
Turkey, Israel, and South Korea. Over the years it’s also come to seen as a
destination country, and most identified victims are trafficked domestically.
Central Asian nationals are used for forced labor in domestic service,
construction, and agriculture in Kazakhstan. Most of the identified victims are
domestic although victims also come from neighboring Central Asian and Eastern
European countries. Traffickers lure young girls and women from poor rural
areas to large cities with promises of work as waitresses, models, or nannies.
Children are also forced into begging, crime or pornography. Kazakhstan was
initially rated Tier 3, but have made steady progress, as shown in Figure 9,
below.

![Kazakhstan’s TIP ranking and policy during governments, 2000–2014](/files/images/timeline_KAZ.png){.img-fluid}

*Figure 9: Kazakhstan’s TIP ranking and policy during governments, 2000–2014*

Statistic                            | Value
-------------------------------------| ---------------------
Average GDP per capita               | $7,952.06
Total aid                            | $15,063.58 million
Aid from US                          | $954.94 million
Average total aid as percent of GDP  | 0.92%
Total TIP grants                     | $7,554,219

*Table 9: Key Kazakhstani statistics, averaged 2001–2013*

## Direct diplomacy

Scorecard diplomacy meetings to discuss TIP were a high priority with
interactions occurring at a high level, often with ministers such as the prime
minister, the minister of justice, the minister of internal affairs and the
foreign minister. The documentation through the cables available begins in
2005, although Kazakhstan was included in the report already in 2001. Despite
this, the cables that discuss TIP constitute 5 percent of the overall available
cables, suggesting that TIP has been a priority issue for the embassy, which
sought to cultivate strong interlocutors and facilitate cooperation among
different stakeholders. Scorecard diplomacy included basic education efforts
such as trips abroad for officials and training of religious leaders in
trafficking. The embassy was also encouraging the creation of a domestic TIP-
policy infrastructure. The embassy was very involved in anti-TIP legislation.
It met with officials to discuss minute details and monitored progress very
closely by attending the inter-agency TIP working group. The embassy also has
had ongoing dialogues about implementation issues and the US has provided
several TIP grants.

## Indirect pressure

Indirect pressure has been an integral part of US scorecard diplomacy in
Kazakhstan. US cooperation with the OSCE and the IOM has reinforced US efforts.
The high level of engagement in the legislative drafting by the US, but also by
the IOM and OSCE – both with US funding –, helped spread the ideas and norms of
TIP legislation by building a “cadre of experts.”[^276] The US has funded the
IOM to collect and analyze non-official TIP statistics, in part through the
information obtained through the NGO network funded by USAID.[^277] Throughout
2006-2007, the US Bureau of International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs
(INL) funded several IOM projects including training of law enforcement
officials, awareness-raising, and an educational campaign.[^278]

US efforts also facilitated cooperation among different stakeholders when, in
March 2006, the US and IOM conducted a round table with NGO representatives and
mid-level government officials from multiple state agencies,[^279] cooperation
that continued the following year.[^280] In April 2007, the embassy’s INL
office hosted a Donor Coordination Meeting with government officials and
participants from the IOM, UNDP, UNODC, UNICEF, and the OSCE, among others,
which became a springboard for future cooperation.[^281] Former Ambassador
Napper also notes that he formed a link to NGOs: “Whenever I would travel I
would always meet with NGOs and I’d meet with them about the
legislation.”[^282]

## Concerns

Image concerns were important for Kazakhstan. The US TIP report gained
prominence during a time when Kazakhstan was keen to improve its reputation in
hopes of gaining the OSCE Chairmanship in 2009, for which it had bid (a goal
finally attained in 2010).[^283] Between the chairmanship, which was awarded in
2007 for 2010, and the energy sector, the embassy reported that Kazakhstan had
“confidence on the international stage.”[^284]

In general the relationship was very hands-on. The US has provided lots of
assistance and the government has been keen to cooperate. The reaction to the
downgrade to the Tier 2 watch list in 2007 was typical; the Ministry of Justice
Office Director thanked the US for the law enforcement training grants,
encouraged future cooperation on victim assistance, expressed desire to learn
from other cases, and asked the embassy to be specific about how Kazakhstan
could improve its TIP rating.”[^285]

## Outcomes

### Legislation

TIP was not a big priority for the government in the late 1990s. In 1999 the
Government’s National Commission on Women’s and Family Issues even declined to
include trafficking in its list of priorities. The first TIP Report came out in
the summer of 2001 and placed Kazakhstan in Tier 3. Larry Napper, the US
Ambassador from 2001 to 2004, recalls intense reactions and interactions with
high-level officials. Initially the government thought they could get by with
cosmetic changes. In February 2002, just before the reporting deadline for the
US TIP Report, the government amended a temporary measure to the criminal code
to cover trafficking of adults. It also initiated training programs for law
enforcement and began to conduct random investigations of travel agencies
promising work abroad. Finally, the head of the President’s Commission on Women
and Family was appointed as government anti-trafficking coordinator.
Implementation was severely lacking, however.

Ambassador Napper reports that during this time he was very involved with the
legislation and that the inter-agency working group became serious about the
law mainly because of the pressure of the US TIP Report:

They initiated that after we had engaged on the political level. It was not
something that I could have got \[the Minister of Justice’s\] attention on. We
would go up to Astana and meet with the Minister of Justice and meet with his
team. First order of business was to get the legislation right. … We went up
and discussed it in conceptual terms, walked through the kind of legislation we
wanted to see; we went into it in very fine detail. They undertook to take it
to the parliament. We monitored it very closely. I’d go and talk with
parliamentary deputies about it and I’d mention the TIP legislation. … At the
time that they were actually doing the legislation I would go up two or three
times within the month or so. We worked on it together.”

After the 2004 report came out the government began to draft amendments to
improve the anti-trafficking legislation. The US, along with the IOM and OSCE,
attended the interagency TIP working group and was involved in the discussion
of the draft amendments.[^286] In April 2005, the Law on Social Assistance,
which the US had urged the government to pass in the 2004 TIP Report, was
passed, providing a mechanism that allowed the government to provide grants to
NGOs.

The spring of 2006 brought considerable progress. In February Parliament passed
legislation to provide identified victims with temporary residence status to
ensure their safe repatriation or participation in trafficking prosecutions. On
March 2nd, 2006, in time for the annual TIP Report update from the embassy to
Washington, the TIP amendments were finally enacted, and on April 10, the “2006
- 2008 National Plan of Action to Combat TIP.” Nonetheless, in 2007 the US
placed Kazakhstan on the watch list because its efforts to prosecute and
convict traffickers had ground to a near halt, with only one conviction in 2006
as opposed to 13 the year before. The US also criticized Kazakhstan for not
doing more to provide victim assistance and protection.[^287] After this, the
embassy met several times with the Director of the Ministry of Justice Office,
and in response to a request of what specifically needed to be done, delivered
a set of written recommendations from the US. Data sharing increased in advance
of the interim assessment.”[^288] A case that led to a set of successful
arrests and convictions later that year was lead by a person trained through
Bureau of International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs (INL)
courses.[^289]

After 2008 Kazakhstan has consistently been rated Tier 2 (with the exception of
2010 when it was on the watch list) and showed some progress on several issues
including assistance to victims.[^290] In 2010 the TIP Report raised the issue
of the forced use of children in cotton and tobacco harvest and cited this as
the main reason for the downgrade. Kazakhstan has made some efforts to address
this issue, but it persists,[^291] as do many of the other trafficking problems
in the country.

### Institution building

The US helped build domestic TIP infrastructure. The biggest effort was the
creation of the anti-TIP center in Karaganda to train police and MVD officers,
and hold roundtables to discuss TIP issues. The US Bureau of International
Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs (INL) heavily supported its operation
even influencing course content.[^292] Through a strong relationship with
several key individuals within the Ministry of Justice, the US was able to
incorporate several recommendations into the National Action Plan.[^293]

### The promotion and adoption of new norms and practices 

The US fostered socialization and learning through training in the anti-TIP
center in Karaganda and high-level exchanges between countries. For example,
when officials asked for information on how to protect and assist victims, the
US actually sent a Kazakhstani interagency delegation to Rome to study how the
Italian government and Italian NGOs protect TIP victims. Once home, the
officials implemented the lessons learned into domestic structures.[^294]
Similarly, when the Chief of the Organized Crime Division suggested
establishing an anti-trafficking interagency in a South Kazakhstan oblast, he
said he had been inspired after attending a US professional exchange program in
Houston where he saw a similar group and interacted with the local sheriff’s
office.”[^295] Thus, US efforts were linked to the diffusion of an
institutional format. The US even conducted a three-year program to train
religious leaders in trafficking issues to promote local tolerance for
returning victims of sex trafficking.[^296]

## Conditioning factors

A persistent obstacle for the effectiveness of scorecard diplomacy in
Kazakhstan was government complicity in trafficking problems. However, this was
countered by a desire to impress the US and the West and the fact that the
embassy developed a strong relationship with key interlocutors. In addition,
the US also had a strong relationship with Kazakhstan of practical assistance
and training, which provided opportunities for interaction and influence.

The Kazakhstan case thus displays many of the elements of scorecard diplomacy:
engagement with NGOs and individual stakeholders within government, the use of
Tier ratings to incentivize the government, the influence on the legislation
and other outcomes, the contribution to the definition of norms embedded in
legislation and the efforts to socialize officials into these norms via
training and exchanges, the contribution to domestic institution building and
data collection, and the facilitation and coordination of other actors such as
IGOs.


[^276]: 05ALMATY406

[^277]: 07ASTANA1147

[^278]: 06ASTANA88, 07ASTANA367, 06ASTANA368, 07ASTANA613

[^279]: 06ASTANA368

[^280]: 07ASTANA1061

[^281]: 07ASTANA1147

[^282]: Napper Interview

[^283]: 05ALMATY1938, see also Christopher Smith, U.S. Congress, House
    of Representatives, “Kazakhstan’s Candidacy for OSCE Chairmanship,”
    109th Cong., 2nd sess., 2006,
    <http://www.csce.gov/index.cfm?FuseAction=ContentRecords.ViewDetail&ContentRecord_id=302&ContentType=S&ContentRecordType=S&Region_id=0&Issue_id=0&IsTextOnly=True>

[^284]: 08ASTANA1355

[^285]: 07ASTANA1666

[^286]: 05ALMATY406

[^287]: 07ASTANA1666

[^288]: 07ASTANA2113

[^289]: 07ASTANA1925

[^290]: 09ASTANA222

[^291]: Curiously, the US DOL Child Labor report continues to cite the
    problem with child exploitation in the cotton fields, while the
    human trafficking reports does not.

[^292]: 09ASTANA210, 09ASTANA434

[^293]: 05ALMATY3419

[^294]: 08ASTANA2165. The trip was handled via the IOM, but funded by
    the US.

[^295]: The International Visitor Leadership Program (IVLP) is the U.S.
    Department of State’s premier professional exchange program.
    09ASTANA1042

[^296]: 05ALMATY3431
