Title: Mozambique
Excerpt: Something
Template: case
Slug: case-studies/mozambique
PDF: /files/pdfs/Case%20study%20-%20Mozambique.pdf


The collaboration between the United States and the government has been
constructive. Tracking developments on domestic anti-TIP legislation shows the
full arc of a country that at first has no anti-trafficking law to a country
that passes this law and deals with the challenge of implementing it.
Mozambique has been a prime recipient of U.S. anti-TIP assistance. The US
technical assistance and consistent diplomatic engagement on the law was
crucial to moving the law along in the legislative process. US engagement
helped raise public awareness to the trafficking issue through public awareness
campaigns, brought together key NGO and government players, and lobbied the
government to take action.

*The case of Mozambique illustrates the importance of the engagement components
of scorecard diplomacy: education and assistance. From the beginning the
Mozambican authorities (in addition to local NGOs and increasingly civil
society) were conscious of the trafficking problem and eager to fix it, which
facilitated cooperation with the US. The collaboration was practical, with the
embassy engaging with the Director of Migration and the Mozambican military’s
commander of border troops. The occasional meetings on TIP were typically high
profile, involving the justice minster or targeting key players, and
accomplished a great deal. Funding for all kinds of anti-TIP projects proposed
by local actors as well as outside donors was consistent and recognized as
influential.*[^389]

*The case of Mozambique also highlights the importance of the local media in
stoking the reputational concerns, the importance of cooperation with IGOs and
NGOs in facilitating change, and the sensitivity to drops in tiers. On the
downside, however, it also highlights the all too common implementation
challenges for countries, especially those with scarce resources, and therefore
the importance of scorecard diplomacy including not only monitoring and
grading, but also practical assistance.*

## Background

Mozambique has a serious trafficking problem, especially along its border with
South Africa, where men and boys are forced to labor in agriculture and
extractive industries or as street vendors. Women and girls from rural areas
are lured to cities on fake promises of employment or education, only to be
exploited in domestic servitude and the sex trade. Children are often forced to
work. Human and drug trafficking commonly co-occur.

![Mozambique’s TIP ranking and policy during governments, 2003–2014](/files/images/timeline_MOZ.png){.img-fluid}

<div class="well"><em>Figure 11</em>: Mozambique’s TIP ranking and policy during governments, 2003–2014</div>

Statistic                             | Value
------------------------------------- | ---------------------
Average GDP per capita                | $371.66
Total aid                             | $28,911.12 million
Aid from US                           | $3,663.10 million
Average total aid as percent of GDP   | 28.2%
Total TIP grants                      | $3,712,000

<div class="well"><em>Table 11</em>: Key Mozambican statistics, averaged 2001–2013</div>

## Direct diplomacy

Scorecard diplomacy meetings occurred regularly and with interactions at a high
level, often ministers and also the president of the National Assembly, the
Minister of Justice, committee leaders, chiefs of police and border patrol,
other relevant ministers. The documentation through the cables available begins
in 2003, when Mozambique was first included in the report. The cables that
discuss TIP constitute 10 percent of the overall available cables, suggesting
that TIP has been a top priority for the embassy. Scorecard diplomacy focused
on providing technical assistance and diplomatic encouragement to pass an anti-
TIP law and the embassy was active in the drafting process. The US also used
meetings to push repeatedly for the implementation of the law to start. The US
also supported construction of the Moamba Reception Center for TIP victims and
encouraged communication between different stakeholders on TIP issues.

## Indirect pressure

The media took a lead role in exposing TIP in Mozambique, and the embassy
worked strategically with them.[^390] For example, during a visit from G/TIP
Africa Reports Officer, the embassy arranged a lunch with a dozen local
journalists who then filed stories on the interview for their newspapers
outlining the problem in Mozambique and emphasizing the US efforts to help
fight trafficking.[^391] Several trafficking cases received widespread coverage
and increased attention to the problem.

NGOs have also amplified US efforts. After the US funded the upstart of the
Moamba Reception Center, it introduced the NGO Save the Children Norway (SCN)
and the Peace Corps to the project, in which they subsequently became
involved.[^392] The US also funded an NGO, Rede CAME, to help disseminate the
new law, training police, border guards, and judicial officials, and building
synergy between civil society and the government[^393] Finally, the US worked
closely with the IOM, providing them support in the drafting of the anti-TIP
legislation,[^394] and funding an IOM research and capacity building program to
strengthen civil society efforts to combat TIP and identify trafficking
patterns.[^395] Thus, NGOs, IGOs, the media and the US were well synchronized.
Scorecard diplomacy enabled media coverage and NGOs facilitated attention to
trafficking.

## Concerns

Although the government was cooperative, the interactions between Mozambique
government officials reveal few explicit statements about their motivations for
cooperating with the US. Progress appeared to be largely driven by media
coverage, which suggests concern with domestic criticism. Meanwhile, suggesting
the benefit of a good reputation on TIP, the embassy encouraged Mozambique to
set an example for its fellow members of the SADC.[^396]

Immediately following the unanimous passing of the anti-TIP law, the embassy
reported that “USG technical assistance and consistent diplomatic engagement
complemented the collaboration between the GRM and a determined civil society”
and that “the USG’s growing financial assistance programs in the country also
provided Post with significant leverage,” presumably resulting in “the GRM
acting with uncharacteristic swiftness” in the closing months.[^397]

## Outcomes

### Legislation

The US first included Mozambique in the TIP Report in 2003, when it gave it a
Tier 2 rating and criticized the absence of an anti-trafficking law. Attention
to TIP heightened drastically in March 2004 after allegations surfaced about
trafficking in human body parts and child disappearances in northern
Mozambique.[^398] The Head of the parliamentary bench for the Mozambique
Liberation Front (FRELIMO) called for an investigation and said the Assembly
would take up anti-trafficking legislation.[^399] The minister of justice asked
the ambassador for “country model” examples of existing TIP legislation that
her committee could use as a guide. The embassy immediately sought to provide
such technical assistance.[^400] After ministerial-level meetings, US-paid
legal consultants were included on the team drafting the legislation. [^401]

When by 2007 the law had not progressed, the US dropped Mozambique to the Watch
List and stressed the need for the law to pass before the tier could improve.
The embassy chargé d’affaires met with the president of the National Assembly
to encourage him to schedule the draft law for debate during the first
legislative agenda of the year, because the agenda had been finalized without
it. The chargé d’affaires urged Mozambique to become the first country in the
South African Development Community (SADC) with a comprehensive law. In a clear
example of US agenda-setting power, within a week, an addendum placed the law
on the current agenda for discussion and the President of the National Assembly
called the chargé d’affaires to assure him. The law was passed on April 10th
that year, just in time to be included in the 2008 TIP Report.[^402] The
embassy reported that the adoption of the law was the “result of a ‘perfect
storm’ in recent months, including a constant lobbying effort by USG officials
and civil society groups coupled with a highly publicized TIP case in
March.”[^403]

By February 2010 still no arrests had been made because implementing
regulations for the 2008 Trafficking Law were still missing. The embassy
offered technical assistance to complete these regulations.[^404] The 2010 TIP
Report once again dropped Mozambique to the watch list, stressing the need for
implementing legislation. By 2011, the regulations were in place and the
government prosecuted and convicted trafficking offenders for the first time
under the anti-trafficking law, increased prevention efforts, and trained local
officials about legal remedies provided under the new law.[^405] Such efforts
have remained steady since.

### Institutions

After passage of the law, US efforts in Mozambique focused on strengthening key
institutions, especially the judiciary and police force.[^406] Due to capacity
issues, however, victim protection has remained weak and run mostly by NGOs.
For this reason, the US has supported construction of the Moamba Reception
Center, a shelter for TIP victims that was influenced by visits to ‘safehouses’
in the US.[^407] The US also contributed to informal institutions. For example,
the embassy led a bimonthly forum for civil society, government, and the
diplomatic corps to discuss trafficking issues.[^408] The USG also funded
meetings between the Mozambican civil society and the Ministry of Justice to
discuss the TIP legislation, and with the South African Legal Reform committee
to discuss South Africa’s approach to drafting an anti-TIP law. These meetings
boosted efforts to “knit together a tighter regional network of Southern
African civil society organizations fighting the growing TIP problem.”[^409]

### The promotion and adoption of new norms and practices 

The Moamba Reception Center for TIP victims was influenced by US practices. On
cable describes how the co-director of the project, Lea Boaventura, visited the
US in 2004 as part of an International Visitor Program. During the time in the
US she visited several “safe houses” for trafficking victims and used part of
what she learned there to design the Moamba Reception Center.[^410]

## Conditioning factors

US influence in Mozambique was facilitated by the government’s acknowledgement
of the problem and its strong will to improve. The US also enjoyed great
cooperation with NGOs and a supportive media environment. The media covered a
couple of timely trafficking cases that helped bring attention to the issue and
in general had strong coverage of trafficking. Furthermore, US assistance
provided some leverage and interaction. The biggest challenges were the scale
of the problem and the lack of resources and capacity for victim protection.


[^389]: 05MAPUTO378

[^390]: 08MAPUTO651

[^391]: 05MAPUTO1030, 08MAPUTO651, 06MAPUTO564, 07MAPUTO886

[^392]: 07MAPUTO1475

[^393]: 07MAPUTO464, 08MAPUTO651

[^394]: 04MAPUTO513\_a. IOM was funded in 2005.

[^395]: 05MAPUTO114

[^396]: 08MAPUTO322

[^397]: 08MAPUTO322

[^398]: 04MAPUTO464\_a

[^399]: 04MAPUTO464

[^400]: 04MAPUTO513

[^401]: 06MAPUTO564

[^402]: 08MAPUTO322. The passage was noted in the 2008 report.

[^403]: 08MAPUTO322

[^404]: 10MAPUTO163

[^405]: 2011 TIP Report

[^406]: 04MAPUTO168

[^407]: 05MAPUTO566

[^408]: 08MAPUTO261

[^409]: 06MAPUTO564

[^410]: 05MAPUTO566
