Title: Nigeria
Excerpt: Something
Template: case
Slug: case-studies/nigeria
PDF: /files/pdfs/Case%20study%20-%20Nigeria.pdf

---

**Contents**

[TOC]

---

In Nigeria, pressure from the scorecard diplomacy has motivated the government
to improve its reputation on TIP. Nigeria was included in the very first 2001
TIP Report as a Tier 2 country. At that time there appeared to be hesitation by
some government officials to discuss trafficking, and an August 2, 2001
diplomatic cable describes a Foreign Ministry official as “visibly
uncomfortable when asked about ongoing trafficking in persons.”[^411] The US
attention towards the issue contributed towards the establishment of
institutions like the National Task Force on Trafficking, which led to the
passage of comprehensive legislation that created a highly successful federal
agency dedicated to fighting trafficking, the National Agency for the
Prohibition of Traffic in Persons (NAPTIP). Rather than leading to a lull in
activity, Nigeria’s excitement about achieving Tier 1 ranking in 2009 spurred
more anti-trafficking work. Although the ranking has since been adjusted to the
more realistic Tier 2, Nigeria continues to focus attention on trafficking.
It’s performance on human trafficking far outshines that on other human rights
conditions in the country, meanwhile raising concerns that countries may excel
in one area that is a strong focus on scorecard diplomacy, while neglecting
other areas.

Overall, however, *Nigeria provides an example of how US scorecard diplomacy
can motivate government officials to focus attention on the problem, and, when
political will exists, lead to successful changes in legislation,
implementation, and institutions.*

## Background

The trafficking problem in Nigeria is large and diverse in nature. Early TIP
reports noted that most trafficking from Nigeria was of women going to Europe
and cited an Italian authorities’ estimate of 10,000 Nigerian prostitutes
working in Italy. Women and children are also trafficked to on plantations in
other African countries and are subjected to sex trade and forced begging in
Nigeria and abroad. The rising prominence of the terrorist organization Boko
Haram has exacerbated abuses.

![Nigeria’s TIP ranking and policy during governments, 2000–2014](/files/images/timeline_NGA.png){.img-fluid}

*Figure 12: Nigeria’s TIP ranking and policy during governments, 2000–2014*

Statistic                             | Value
------------------------------------- | ---------------------
Average GDP per capita                | $1,972.22
Total aid                             | $50,490.19 million
Aid from US                           | $4,989.99 million
Average total aid as percent of GDP   | 1.36%
Total TIP grants                      | $3,295,000

*Table 12: Key Nigerian statistics, averaged 2001–2013*

## Indirect pressure

The US worked with both NGOs and IGOs to enhance the pressure and capacity for
Nigeria to fight human trafficking. The embassy engaged with NGOs, for example
visiting the Women’s Consortium of Nigeria (WOCON), which had long been doing
anti-TIP work and which the US funded.[^412] Several times, the embassy met
with TIP stakeholders in Abuja, “including foreign Embassies and NGOs,[^413]
showing how the US was working with and through these other actors. The U.S.
embassy and NAPTIP also developed a national stakeholders forum with relevant
state working groups, in addition to domestic NGOs and international agencies
such as UNICEF, USAID, ILO, and the IOM. The US also funded IGOs to carry out
anti-TIP work, including the IOM anti-TIP training module for police recruits
mentioned above.[^414] The US Department of Labor funded a regional study of
child trafficking patterns in eight West African countries, including
Nigeria.”[^415]

## Concerns

Nigeria was strongly motivated to earn a Tier 1 rating, because it saw
trafficking in persons as an issue on which the country could earn a strong
international reputation. To this end it held an international summit on
trafficking in persons in 2002. Nigeria successfully worked to be seen as a
regional role model on anti-TIP policy.[^416] The US DOS used Nigeria as a
showcase example and the international media promulgated this idea. For
example, on June 19th, 2009, a *Christian Science Monitor’s* editorial used
Nigeria as example of how developing countries can take anti-TIP steps.[^417]

To improve Nigeria’s Tier rating, the US worked closely with high-level
officials to provide specific recommendations on TIP policy. In one one-on-one
meeting, the embassy recounts that the Minister of Justice was thankful for the
advice and “was fascinated by the list of Tier 1, Tier 2, and Tier 3 countries
from the State Department website. He said Nigeria could certainly reach Tier 2
for the 2005 Trafficking in Persons Report. He added that his goal was for
Nigeria to be a Tier 1 country.”[^418] In 2009, when Nigeria received a Tier 1
rating, officials were quick to take credit. The Nigerian newspaper *This Day*
featured a story about NAPTIP titled “Human Trafficking, Worst Crime Against
Mankind.” In it, NAPTIP Executive Secretary Simon Egede said that he was not
surprised that the most recent TIP Report raised Nigeria to Tier 1 based on all
the work of NAPTIP and previous Executive Secretary Carol Ndaguba.[^419]

Nigeria was concerned with how criticisms on TIP might interfere with its
reputation in the UN Human Rights council. In one October 2008 meeting, U.S.
officials discussed trafficking issues with the Director of the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs International Organizations Department Second United Nations
Division. During the meeting, the director noted that Nigeria’s was preparing
for its UN Human Rights Council Universal Periodic Review (UPR) in February
2009 and worried how the criticisms in the TIP Report would affect their
review. The embassy reported, “Ibrahim stated that the GON is ‘doing a lot to
improve human rights’, but still receives negative reports such as the U.S
Human Rights Report and the Trafficking In Persons (TIP) Report which will
undoubtedly be cited during the UPR.”[^420]

## Outcomes

### Legislation

Beginning in 1999, the Women Trafficking and Child Labour Eradication
Foundation (WOTCLEF), an NGO founded by Amina Titi Atiku Abubakar, wife of Vice
President Atiku, led civil society groups to sponsor an anti-trafficking bill.
The TIP Report criticized Nigeria for lacking a comprehensive anti-TIP law
right from the beginning. By the 2002 report, a federal legislation draft
existed that was modeled on a law recently passed by Edo State, although the
proposed legislation only addressed trafficking of women and children. In June
2002 the House of Representatives passed the anti-TIP bill, which the Senate
then passed in February 2003, just in time for US reporting deadlines. The bill
was signed into law in July that year, establishing the Nigerian Government’s
anti-trafficking agency, the National Agency for the Prohibition of Trafficking
in Persons (NAPTIP).

Despite passing the bill, Nigeria devoted few resources to actual anti-TIP
policy. However, in September 2003 the President appointed Mrs. Carol Ndaguba
as the first head of NAPTIP. “\[This\] sudden surge in Nigerian law enforcement
efforts against child trafficking,” the US embassy wrote, “has drawn greater
attention to the magnitude of this problem in the region while also reflecting
improved political will to crack down on trafficking crimes in general.”[^421]
The embassy noted its own efforts to encourage Nigeria to step up these
efforts, and a cable describes the close relationship the U.S. and Nigeria were
developing to combat trafficking. [^422]

Despite US praise for the new law and the new agency, the US continued to
criticize Nigeria on enforcement issues. It downgraded Nigeria to the watch
list in 2004 “because of the continued significant complicity of Nigerian
security personnel in trafficking and the lack of evidence of increasing
efforts to address this complicity.”[^423] The report also criticized Nigeria’s
efforts to prevent trafficking, shelter and train victims of trafficking, and
to prosecute traffickers and other involved parties. Indeed, the US itself was
spending more than $3 million trying to bolster enforcement, including training
prosecutors, law enforcements, and judicial officials, running rehabilitation
shelters for victims, developing reports, raising public awareness, and
more.[^424]

The TIP law was amended in 2005 to increase penalties for traffickers. The 2005
TIP Report praised the many successes of NAPTIP including improved response and
stronger efforts across the law enforcement spectrum, the increased federal and
state efforts aimed at prevention, and the opening of a stakeholders forum
where interested parties come together to discuss best practices and progress
in anti-TIP efforts. However, the report also called out corruption among law
enforcement and immigration officials.[^425]

In the years to come, NAPTIP worked to enforce the law and succeeded in keeping
the issue an ongoing priority. For example, Nigeria and Benin signed an
important agreement to fight trafficking.[^426] In 2008 NAPTIP announced its
TIP statistics at its annual stakeholder meeting showing that it had handled
587 cases of human trafficking for “sexual exploitation and child abuse”
between October 2007 and May 2008. Furthermore, the agency convicted ten
traffickers during the same period.[^427] Nigeria received a Tier 1 rating from
2009-2011, but in 2012 the US dropped Nigeria to Tier 2, citing stagnation in
several areas including federal funding for NAPTIP, provision of protective
services, victim reintegration, and maintenance of NAPTIP facilities. Nigeria
has remained there since, its efforts ongoing, but with remaining room for
improvement.

### Institution building

The US supported institution building in multiple ways. In the early years, the
Department of Labor funded an ILO-IPEC program that in turn funded efforts by
the inter-ministerial TIP Committee to create a national plan against
trafficking.[^428] The US worked closely with NAPTIP Executive Secretary Carol
Ndaguba and many other high level anti-TIP officers[^429] and lobbied for more
funding for strengthening NAPTIP.

With encouragement from the US,[^430] Nigeria’s TIP database became operative
in September 2008. This NAPTIP project was sponsored by the American Bar
Association’s Rule of Law Initiative and connected to all NAPTIP zonal offices.
The solar powered main server provides 24-hour access and greater operational
capacity to allow law enforcement and civil society across the country to
collect and collate data in an effective and efficient manner.[^431]

The US additionally supported institutional and capacity development. For
example, the Department of Justice provided investigative training to Nigerian
law enforcement agencies.[^432] The American Bar Association Rule of Law
Initiative (ABA-ROLI) also created a training manual for the immigration
service and trained judges, prosecutors, and staff of many other government
agencies.

### The promotion and adoption of new norms and practices

The US engaged in efforts to educate police officers on the trafficking
problem. USG officials met with police commissioners who lacked a basic
understanding of TIP, and the embassy explained the distinctions between
trafficker and victim, trafficking and smuggling, and so on. The US funded an
IOM effort to add an anti-TIP training module to the basic training curriculum
for new police recruits. [^433] They also sent representatives from Nigeria’s
civil society, government and media to attend U.S. programs on trafficking
issues.”[^434] The ultimate impact of these efforts is difficult to assess,
however.

## Conditioning factors

Several factors worked initially against scorecard diplomacy in Nigeria. In the
early years the influence of scorecard diplomacy was hampered by official
complicity in trafficking and corruption. NAPTIP officials also claimed “a lack
of resources limited their ability to act more aggressively.”[^435] In
addition, in one 2002 cable, the US embassy also complains to Washington of a
large Italian donation of resources, noting that such unconditional aid was
hampering US efforts to exert leverage.[^436]

However, as the years went by, the US and Nigeria developed a strong working
relationship on TIP, a relationship that included a strong financial commitment
from the US, which funded a wide variety of activities, training prosecutors,
law enforcements, and judicial officials, running rehabilitation shelters for
victims, developing reports, raising public awareness, and more.[^437] Progress
occurred, facilitated by the embassy’s strong working relationship with NAPTIP
leadership, especially Carol Ndaguba, who continued to be involved with NAPTIP
after she stepped down. Another helpful factor was a desire for Nigeria to
serve as a regional leader and to use its reputation on TIP to improve its
reputation on human rights more generally, a role the US was quick to
promulgate.


[^411]: 01ABUJA1921\_a

[^412]: 04LAGOS300\_a, 05LAGOS1401\_a

[^413]: 09ABUJA326\_a, 09ABUJA951

[^414]: 03ABUJA515

[^415]: 02ABUJA857\_a

[^416]: 06ABUJA1518\_a, 09ABUJA1437\_a

[^417]: The Christian Science Monitor’s Editorial Board, “A Stop Sign
    for Human Trafficking,” *The Christian Science Monitor*, 19 June
    2009, accessed 26 Dec. 2016,
    <http://www.csmonitor.com/Commentary/the-monitors-view/2009/0619/p08s01-comv.html>.

[^418]: 04ABUJA1839\_a

[^419]: 7/06/2009, This Day, “Roland Ogbonnaya, “Nigeria: Naptip – Human
    Trafficking, Worst Crime Against Mankind.”,” *allAfrica,* originally
    published on *This Day*, 5 July 2009, accessed 26 Dec. 2016,
    <http://allafrica.com/stories/200907060237.html>.

[^420]: 08ABUJA2048

[^421]: 03ABUJA1916\_a

[^422]: 04ABUJA167\_a

[^423]: TIP Report, 2004

[^424]: 04ABUJA167\_a

[^425]: 2005 TIP Report

[^426]: Max Amuchie, “Nigeria, Benin Sign MOU On Child Trafficking,”
    *allAfrica,* originally published on *This Day,* 10 June 2005,
    accessed 26 Dec. 2016,
    <http://allafrica.com/stories/200506130490.html>.

[^427]: 08ABUJA1023\_a

[^428]: 03ABUJA515

[^429]: 05LAGOS1891\_a

[^430]: 07LAGOS193\_a

[^431]: 08ABUJA1950\_a

[^432]: 08ABUJA770\_a

[^433]: 03ABUJA515

[^434]: 04ABUJA167\_a

[^435]: 06ABUJA1518\_a

[^436]: A cable describing the situation ends with a scathing comment on
    Italy’s actions: “This has been a case study in how not to deliver
    law enforcement assistance in a country with a serious corruption
    problem. Aside from losing valuable leverage to prod the GON into
    adopting a more sincere and aggressive anti-TIP effort, the Italian
    Government has not helped our efforts to craft a smaller yet more
    focused and effective anti-TIP law enforcement project as the GON
    may now be reluctant to accept USG conditions on aid worth a
    fraction of the strings-free Italian largesse.” 02ABUJA358\_a

[^437]: 04ABUJA167\_a
