Title: Oman
Template: case
Slug: case-studies/oman
PDF: /files/pdfs/Case%20study%20-%20Oman.pdf


Because Oman was so concerned with its image, the US was successful in bringing
attention to trafficking and bringing about legal changes. Meetings occurred at
high levels and were at times frequent. The country’s first inclusion in the
TIP Report was in 2005, when Oman was rated Tier 2. The 2006 report dropped
Oman to the Watch List, and when the US saw no improvement, in 2007 and 2008
Oman was rated the lowest Tier 3. The low ranking prompted a severe crisis in
the relationship and resulted in cancelled meetings and combative ultimatums.
Eventually, this confrontation did lead to new legislation being passed and to
practices in some areas of trafficking improving. The US embassy engaged
strongly with Omani officials on the topic, discussing TIP in meetings at least
6-8 times a year and often bringing the issue up directly in meetings one on
one with the ambassador and high-level officials such as the labor minister.

While the US exerted considerable influence and progress was made in the late
2000s, it has since stalled. Figure 13 shows how the severe drop in the tier
rating correlated with improvements in policies, but also how the lack of tier
pressure since then has been matched by increasing complacency in the
government efforts.

*The Oman case thus illustrates just how serious some countries take the tier
ratings and the high level of politics they can reach, but also that the
concern may be more with appearances than substance. Such concern can be
elicited to prompt change, but this may remain superficial.*

## Background

Although its labor practices and laws presented conditions that were very
conducive to labor exploitation, especially of foreigners, Oman was ignoring
human trafficking in the early 2000s. With over 640,000 undocumented foreign
workers, making up 80-85 percent of the private workforce, abuses were
prevalent, especially given the practice of withholding passports from domestic
workers.[^438] As in some other Arab countries, there were reports of issues
with children trafficked for use as camel jockeys,[^439] and with about a
quarter to half of Oman’s labor force being foreign, Oman’s “sponsorship
system” of migrant workers left many in the complete control of employers.

![Oman’s TIP ranking and policy during governments, 2000–2014](/files/images/timeline_OMN.png){.img-fluid}

<div class="well"><em>Figure 13</em>: Oman’s TIP ranking and policy during governments, 2000–2014</div>

Statistic                             | Value
------------------------------------- | --------------------
Average GDP per capita                | $770.75
Total aid                             | $6,564.27 million
Aid from US                           | $1,273.57 million
Average total aid as percent of GDP   | 6.33%
Total TIP grants                      | $1,302,555

<div class="well"><em>Table 13</em>: Key Omani statistics, averaged 2001–2013</div>

## Indirect pressure 

Indirect pressure was not a significant factor in enhancing scorecard diplomacy
in Oman. The media, being mostly under state influence, was generally not
helpful to the US efforts. Rather, the government used the media to defend its
image and criticize the reports in public.[^440] The US also was unable to work
much through NGOs, which were quite scarce in Oman.

IGOs were a bit more active. The UN sent a Special Rapporteur on trafficking in
persons on a five-day fact-finding mission, and the subsequent report made it
clear that the UN shared the US concerns, which made it harder for Oman to
simply frame US criticism as political blackmail. Nevertheless, the UN did not
have much direct involvement thereafter. [^441] The ILO has also been active in
Oman, but extensive cooperation with the US is not evident.[^442]

## Concerns

Oman was highly concerned with losing face and was worried about its domestic
and international image. As one embassy cable pointed out after the 2007 drop
to Tier 3, “It is exceptionally rare for Omanis to hear information critical of
their country. So, the Tier 3 ranking came as a major embarrassment for Oman,
and top officials are feigning surprise.” [^443] While keen to take actions to
improve its rating, officials were also concerned with not wanting to be seen
to cower to US demands.[^444] The state-owned daily *Observer* and private
daily *Times of Oman* ran articles interviewing South Asian and Western expats,
who added their voices of support to Oman’s rejection of the TIP Report. In the
fall of 2007, a US cable noted, “The discrepancy between shock and anger
expressed in public and the government’s steady, yet quiet action suggests that
the government may be trying to save face while attempting to fulfill the
recommendations in the TIP action plan.”[^445] After the 2008 Tier 3 rating, it
was so upset that it even enlisted the Gulf Cooperation Council to endorse the
Sultan’s official rejection of the US report.[^446] After the extensive
domestic reaction, the embassy described Oman as “\[f\]eeling that its Sultan
has been dishonored and its national honor has been impugned...” [^447] To
protect its image, the government promoted massive criticism of the US report
in the media and the Omani Journalists Association condemned the report as
false allegations. [^448] An official told the embassy that, “although the
Sultan was very upset about the report, Qaboos was more concerned about the
international image of his country.” [^449] The CEO of the Oman Petroleum
Services Association (OPAL), who also advised the Minister of Manpower on labor
affairs, told the embassy “that it was unfortunate that the USG published its
report while the Sultan is outside of Oman on his European trip and therefore
more exposed to international scrutiny and criticism. ‘You likely caught him by
surprise,’ Balushi surmised, forcing the Sultan to defend his country before
Western leaders and explain why Oman is not like the other countries on Tier
3.”[^450] Thus, both in 2007 and 2008, the reactions were all very much about
image.

The concern with loss of face was also partly because Oman feared the practical
repercussion of a reputational loss. The chairman of the Chamber of Commerce
and Industry (OCCI) told the embassy he was concerned that the Tier 3 ranking
would hurt Oman’s trade and investment.[^451] Sanctions fears, however, were
not a big issue. In all the cables, an actual Omani reaction to the sanction
threat was only mentioned once, and in that context, the MFA reaction was one
of “disbelief and confusion” over possible sanctions, and the US embassy
immediately recommended a waiver.[^452] It was probably clear to all that
sanctions were not going to happen. Indeed, Oman seemed to be the one with the
leverage. As the embassy noted, in addition to aid, “Post’s Office of Military
Cooperation (OMC) currently is managing 52 active Foreign Military Sales (FMS)
cases valued at $1.04 billion …\[\]… The sequencing of the TIP Report’s release
and the start of \[Gulf Security Dialogue\] consultations in Washington may
cause some problems with the latter. We therefore recommend that the Department
arrange a meeting between under secretaries Badr and Dobriansky to clarify the
USG position on TIP in the larger context of regional and national security.”
[^453] Concerns about image thus were partly about how it might harm trade and
investment.

Given its strong concern, Oman acted sought to raise its rating to improve its
image.[^454] That its concern with trafficking was not intrinsically motivated
to improve trafficking but rather to improve the rating was clear by its
attempts to threaten the US to change its rating,[^455] which by and large
succeeded and led to celebration in the state-directed news media, showing the
concern with maintaining a good domestic reputation.[^456]

## Outcomes

### Legislation

Many of Oman’s actions on TIP can be traced to specific US recommendations, and
its been documented that in 2007 after the drop to the tier 3 rating, Omani
officials took notes in meetings with US officials about what they needed to
do.[^457] The US was heavily involved with the drafting of TIP
legislation.[^458] The Ministry of Foreign Affairs requested and received
examples of anti-TIP legislation from the US embassy,[^459] and the embassy
reported that “comments provided by an expert contracted by G/TIP have been
well-received by Oman’s anti-trafficking committee.” [^460] Omani officials
themselves recognized the external assistance on the legislation.[^461]

Because passage of the law was still pending, however, in the summer of 2008
the US kept Oman at Tier 3. Omani officials were furious. In a June 11, 2008
cable to Washington ominously titled “Addressing our Tier 3 TIP dispute with
Oman,” the embassy reported that it had told Oman that the rating couldn’t be
changed without some action from Oman, and lamented, “We therefore are caught
in a dispute in which there is little common ground, and with a partner that
has indicated its willingness to wager the relationship on the outcome of the
matter.” The cable goes on to consider the various issues at stake, including
the FTA and Omani support of the middle East Peace Process.[^462] After the
2008 rating was released, the media fed public outrage in Oman and regional
states, leading the embassy to note: “It appears that Oman is willing to stoke
this popular resentment in its drive to get the Tier 3 ranking retracted.”
[^463] The US eventually caved in and “revised”[^464] the rating, based on a
promise from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs Secretary General on the anti-
trafficking legislation still in process: “Our friends did not let us down, and
we will not let them down.”[^465] He stated that he had seen the final version
of Oman’s new anti-TIP law, currently with the Council of Ministers for review,
and that news of the President’s determination would allow the legislation to
move to the “fast track” for approval.” The promise was kept. After the
November 2008 passage of the new law criminalizing human trafficking, the
embassy noted, “The new law as adopted is almost the same as an earlier draft
that won approval from the USG-funded international expert that worked with
Oman on the legislation.” [^466] The link between US recommendations and the
new law is thus very strong both in timing and content.

Other efforts to follow US recommendations include the distribution of
pamphlets, public awareness campaigns, a directive on passports, and
construction of a shelter.

After the 2008 confrontation,[^467] Oman settled, perhaps too comfortably, at
Tier 2. The TIP Report continues to acknowledge that the government is trying,
but lament the “modest effort,” “minimal progress”, or even “no discernible”
efforts across some areas of performance.

### Institution building 

Aside from building a shelter, there is no evidence in the cables that the US
influenced domestic institutions in Oman.

### Promotion and adoption of new norms and practices

The US has helped change the norms around camel racing and the issue of human
trafficking have become acknowledged as a problem. Otherwise, however, it has
not changed attitudes: concern with trafficking was clearly not intrinsically
motivated. Efforts were geared purely at improving the rating itself, not the
underlying conditions. This was clear by its attempts to threaten the US to
change its rating.

## Conditioning factors

Major obstacles to US scorecard diplomacy include the government’s complete
denial of the problem and its full control of the domestic media. The fact that
the government clearly was willing to let the issue spill over into other areas
of cooperation and threaten the US contributed to a highly confrontational
relationship. Nonetheless, some progress was achieved because of the
government’s strong professed concern about its domestic and international
image, as well as its concern about spillovers into trade.


[^438]: 08MUSCAT184

[^439]: 05ABUDHABI4979

[^440]: 07MUSCAT822

[^441]: 06MUSCAT1575

[^442]: <http://www.ilo.org/global/topics/forced-labour/news/WCMS\_146443/lang--en/index.htm>

[^443]: 07MUSCAT822

[^444]: 07MUSCAT822

[^445]: 07MUSCAT822

[^446]: Accessed December 27, 2016.

    08MUSCAT469

[^447]: 08MUSCAT431

[^448]: Oman Tribune, Sultanate hails US on trafficking list move.
    Available at
    <http://www.omantribune.com/index.php?page=news&id=37393&heading=Other%20Top%20Stories>
    Last accessed 19 Oct. 2015.

[^449]: 08MUSCAT634

[^450]: 08MUSCAT464

[^451]: 07MUSCAT788

[^452]: 07MUSCAT597

[^453]: 08MUSCAT425, 07MUSCAT597

[^454]: 08MUSCAT634

[^455]: 08MUSCAT431

[^456]: Oman Tribune, Sultanate hails US on trafficking list move.
    Available at
    <http://www.omantribune.com/index.php?page=news&id=37393&heading=Other%20Top%20Stories>
    Last accessed 19 Oct. 2015.

[^457]: 08MUSCAT409

[^458]: 07MUSCAT193, 07MUSCAT778

[^459]: 07MUSCAT193

[^460]: 07MUSCAT734

[^461]: 07MUSCAT778

[^462]: 08MUSCAT431

[^463]: 08MUSCAT443

[^464]: The US president issued a waiver. The move was essentially to
    upgrade Oman to the watch list. However, the Tier was not
    retroactively revised. Officially, the presidential determination
    was to “Make the determination provided in section 110(d)(3) of the
    Act, concerning the determination of the Secretary of State with
    respect to Moldova and Oman.” The White House, “Presidential
    Determination No. 2009–5 of October 17, 2008. Presidential
    Determination With Respect To Foreign Governments’ Efforts Regarding
    Trafficking In Persons.” Section 110(d)(3) is regarding “Subsequent
    compliance.”

[^465]: 08MUSCAT732

[^466]: 08MUSCAT830

[^467]: 08MUSCAT425, 08MUSCAT431, 08MUSCAT527, 07MUSCAT597\_a
