Title: Case studies
Date: 2017-04-08
Modified: 2017-04-08 23:42:58
Excerpt: Something
Template: case
Slug: case-studies
PDF: /files/pdfs/Case%20study%20supplement.pdf


While many more cases are touched upon in the book manuscript, in all 15 cases were studied in depth. These included: Argentina, Armenia, Chad, Ecuador, Honduras, Indonesia, Israel, Japan, Kazakhstan, Malaysia, Mozambique, Nigeria, Oman, the United Arab Emirates, and Zimbabwe. The case studies form the base of this book. Only Armenia, Israel, Japan, and Zimbabwe were selected for fuller discussion in the book itself. All the case studies are therefore discussed here more fully. This cases here should be read in conjunction with the book. In particular, the case study selection as well as data comparing cases with non-cases is discussed in the [Methods Appendix](/case-studies/case-selection/) of the book and should be read before reading these cases.

These case studies provide the background for the coding in Tables A6.6–9 in the book. They also provide the background for the discussion in Chapters 7 and 8 in particular.

## Defining outcomes: The human trafficking situation or government efforts?

It is important to be clear about how to think about outcomes for research on
scorecard diplomacy. In the case of human trafficking, one might argue that one
should ultimately consider whether the larger problem of human trafficking has
been mitigated in meaningful ways on the ground. This is very difficult,
however, because data on actual human trafficking outcomes is very poor.
Indeed, our increasing access to better data also obscures trends in outcomes,
although data on prosecutions and convictions, presented in the book, give some
base lines at least for increased successes in fighting human trafficking.

Regardless of which data or measures one uses, in most countries the results of
scorecard diplomacy on human trafficking outcomes has been mixed. The problem
clearly persists even in countries that fight it hard; no country can declare
victory. Human trafficking is a horrific and obstinate crime. Like murders,
government efforts can mitigate their frequency, but the problem is unlikely to
be eradicated in the absence of the eradication of very deep-seated and complex
societal causes.[^1] Countries’ efforts to fight trafficking cannot be measured
at any given time as being accomplished or not. The nature of human trafficking
is such that there is no final outcome per se, only ongoing efforts to fight
it, and these efforts may ebb and wane. Indeed, this is one of the motivations
of the US TIP Report’s ongoing nature. Government efforts are supposed to be
sustained to maintain good rankings, and this endeavor never anticipates
completion. Government attention to the problem has also proven sporadic in
many countries. Even the US could do far more to fight trafficking within its
borders, but the issue must compete for resources and attention like any other
issue.

Instead of focusing on measures of the human trafficking outcomes data, another
way is to consider the effectiveness of scorecard diplomacy is to consider the
efforts countries are making to address trafficking and in this case more
specifically their responses to US efforts to push certain recommendations for
how to do so. This is more aligned with the more immediate objectives of
scorecard diplomacy as it assesses the extent to which the policy is effective
as motivating desired changes, rather than whether those policy solutions are
actually the optimal ones. Therefore, *the outcomes in these cases focus on
diplomatic “successes.”* The cases describe incidents in countries that
constituted some progress at that point in time according to the policies the
US was pushing. In the cases it is possible to observe some incidents or
periods when the US efforts appear to have considerable traction and help move
things forward, while at other times there is stagnation or backsliding.
Progress may occur when a policy advances, a new agency is created, a shelter
is built or a new action plan is drawn up. Again, that does not mean that the
country has solved the problem, or that the efforts have been maintained at
high standards. It simple illustrates instances where some progress was made,
or, conversely, times when it failed.

The case study methodology as well as the case selection is discussed in the
Methodological Appendix of the book. As explained there, in drawing inferences
about US influence, the analysis paid attention not only to sequencing, but
also to the congruence between the substance of US recommendation and country
behavior as well as statements by people involved that directly addressed
causality.

Because the case studies aim to understand scorecard diplomacy, they have been
reorganized from chronological accounts into discussions of the major steps of
the scorecard diplomacy cycle, shown in Figure A.

![The scorecard diplomacy cycle](/files/images/scorecard_diplomacy_cycle.png){.img-fluid}

*Figure A: The scorecard diplomacy cycle*

Each case begins with a summary of the scorecard diplomacy of the case,
followed by a *very* brief account of the trafficking situation in each
country. This account is based mostly on recent TIP Reports, which interested
readers should read for much greater details. The case studies then discuss the
indirect pressure by NGOs, IGOs and the media and analyze the nature of the
concerns revealed in the cases. The next sections discuss the results in terms
of traceable effects of scorecard diplomacy on legislation, institutions, norms
and practices. Each case study ends by discussing any factors that conditioned
the influence of scorecard diplomacy.

## References

Alon, Gideon. 2002. “Report: 3,000 Women a Year Trapped in Sex Slave Industry.”
In: Haaretz.

———. 2006. “Human Traffickers to be Sentenced to 16-20 Years in Prison.”
October 17, 2006. <http://www.haaretz.com/news/human-traffickers-to-be-
sentenced-to-16-20-years-in-prison-1.201598> (January 5, 2016).

Efrat, Asif. 2012. *Governing Guns, Preventing Plunder: International
Cooperation against Illicit Trade*. Oxford.

Gilbert, Nina. 2001. “Coalition MKs losing restraint.” In *Jerusalem Post*.

Katzenstein, Peter J. 1996. *Cultural norms and national security: Police and
military in postwar Japan*. Cambridge Univ Press.

Onishi, Norimitsu. 2005. “Japan, easygoing till now, plans sex traffic
crackdown.” In *New York Times*. New York.

Wheaton, Elizabeth M, Edward J Schauer, and Thomas V Galli. 2010. Economics of
human trafficking. *International Migration* 48 (4): 114-141.


[^1]: Wheaton, Schauer, and Galli 2010.
